The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Orkneyinga Saga, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Orkneyinga Saga

Author: Anonymous

Editor: Joseph Anderson

Translator: Jon A Hjaltalin
            Gilbert Goudie

Release Date: August 18, 2018 [EBook #57723]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORKNEYINGA SAGA ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          THE ORKNEYINGA SAGA




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        Printed by R. & R. Clark

                                  FOR

                    EDMONSTON & DOUGLAS, EDINBURGH.

                LONDON          HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO.
                CAMBRIDGE   MACMILLAN AND CO.
                GLASGOW      JAMES MACLEHOSE.




------------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: ST. MAGNUS CATHEDRAL
(South Transept and part of Choir)]


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  THE


                            ORKNEYINGA SAGA



                     TRANSLATED FROM THE ICELANDIC
                 BY JON A. HJALTALIN AND GILBERT GOUDIE



                  EDITED, WITH NOTES AND INTRODUCTION

                           BY JOSEPH ANDERSON

      KEEPER OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE ANTIQUARIES OF SCOTLAND



                               EDINBURGH
                         EDMONSTON AND DOUGLAS
                                  1873


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.

                                -------


THE ORKNEYINGA SAGA is the history of the Orkneymen, Earls and Odallers
of Norwegian extraction, who established an Earldom of Norway in the
Northern Scottish Isles a thousand years ago, and whose descendants for
several centuries held sway over the Hebrides and Northern Mainland of
Scotland. Commencing with the conquest of the Isles by Harald Harfagri,
the Saga relates the subsequent history of the Earldom of Orkney under
the long line of its Norse Jarls, and is, for a period of three
centuries and a half, the principal authority for the history of
Northern Scotland. The narrative is mainly personal, and therefore
picturesque, pourtraying the men in person and character, impartially
recording their deeds, and mentioning what was thought of them and their
actions at the time. Occasionally the Saga-writer is enabled to do this
in the words of a contemporary Skald. The skaldic songs, so often
quoted, were the materials from which the Sagas were subsequently
elaborated. In estimating their value as historical materials, it must
be borne in mind that all history has begun in song. When great events
and mighty deeds were preserved for posterity by oral recitation alone,
it was necessary that the memory should be enabled to retain its hold of
the elements of the story by some extraneous artistic aid, and therefore
they were welded by the word-smith’s rhymes into a compact and
homogeneous “lay.” Thus, worked into a poetical setting (as the jeweller
mounts his gems to enhance their value and ensure their preservation),
they passed as heirlooms from generation to generation, floating on the
oral tradition of the people. Snorri Sturluson tells us that the songs
of the skalds who were with Harald Harfagri in his wars were known and
recited in his day, after an interval of nearly four centuries. “These
songs,” he says, “which were sung in the presence of kings and chiefs,
or of their sons, are the materials of our history; what they tell of
their deeds and battles we take for truth; for though the skalds did no
doubt praise those in whose presence they stood, yet no one would dare
to relate to a chief what he and those who heard it knew to be wholly
imaginary or false, as that would not be praise but mockery.” Our
earliest Scottish chroniclers did not disdain to make use of the
lay-smith’s craft, as a help to history, long after the Iceland skald
had been succeeded by the Saga-writer, and the flowery recitative of an
unclerkly age superseded by the terser narrative of the parchment
scribe. The art is as old as Odin and the gods, if indeed it be not
older, and these its creations. But its golden age had passed ere
Paganism began to give way before Christianity, and the specimens we
have in this Saga are mostly of the period of its decadence and by
inferior skalds. Yet it is significant of the esteem in which the art
continued to be held by the settlers in the Orkneys, that we find Earl
Sigurd honouring Gunnlaug Ormstunga with princely gifts, Arnor
Jarlaskald enjoying the special favour and friendship of Earl Thorfinn,
and Earl Rögnvald, the founder of the cathedral, courting for himself
the reputation of an accomplished skald.

But though we can thus trace to some extent the authorship of the
unwritten materials from which the Saga was framed, there is nothing to
show where or by whom it was written. There is proof, however, that it
was known in Iceland in the first half of the thirteenth century. Its
earlier chapters, down to the division of the Earldom between Thorfinn
and Brúsi, are incorporated into the Olaf Saga of Snorri Sturluson, and
are there cited as from the “Jarla Saga,” or Saga of the Earls. It must
therefore have been in existence as a completed work before 1241, the
date of Snorri’s death. The compiler of the Fagrskinna, which is shown
by internal evidence to have been written between 1222 and 1225, also
quotes from it, by the title of “Jarla Sagan.” The closing chapters of
the Orkneyinga Saga, in its present form, recording the burning of
Bishop Adam, could not have been written before 1222; but, as it is
stated in the last chapter that the terrible retribution exacted by the
Scottish King for the murder of the Bishop was still in fresh memory, it
may very well have been completed before 1225. No manuscript of the
Jarla Saga is known to exist, and the original form of what is now
called “The Orkneyinga Saga” is thus matter of conjecture. We know it
only as the substance of its earlier chapters was given by Snorri
previous to 1241, and in the expanded version of the Flateyjarbók, where
it is pieced into the Sagas of Olaf Tryggvi’s son and Olaf the Holy. The
Flateyjarbók, however, is nearly a century and a half later than
Snorri’s work, having been written between the years 1387 and 1394.

The object of the present issue being simply to provide a plain,
readable, and unadorned translation of the Orkneyinga Saga (which has
been hitherto inaccessible to the English reader), it has been deemed
advisable to adhere to the form of the Saga adopted by its first editor
Jonæus, though not to Jonæus’s text, which is by no means free from
corruptions. The Christiania edition of the Flateyjarbók, printed
literally from the manuscript, has afforded the means of rectifying the
text where necessary; and the expanded version of the earlier chapters
given in the Flateyjarbók has also been translated and inserted as an
appendix, for the sake of the fuller details which it supplies of the
earlier history of the Earldom. In one sense it might have been
desirable to have compiled a text which would have given the fullest
history of the Orkney Earls, but this would not have been the
“Orkneyinga Saga.” It would have necessitated the collection and
critical collation of all the passages in all the Sagas and early
writings relating to the history of the Northmen in Scotland—a work
which has long been in progress in abler hands, and under more
favourable auspices.

The Introduction, however, has been compiled with a view to supplement
the Saga narrative, as well as to furnish a continuation of the history
of the Earldom down to the time when it ceased to form part of the
Norwegian dominions. Some account of the islands previous to the Norse
invasion, and a few notices of their antiquities and ecclesiastical
remains, as well as of the existing traces of the Norsemen, seemed
requisite to supplement the notes in illustration of the text.
Chronological and Genealogical Tables have been added to facilitate
reference; and on the maps of Scotland and of the island-groups which
formed the Earldom proper are shown the names of the principal places
mentioned in the Sagas as known to the Northmen.

In conclusion, I have to express my obligations to those kind friends
who have aided me with their advice and assistance. To Dr. John Stuart,
Dr. John Hill Burton, Sir Henry Dryden, Bart., and Colonel Balfour of
Balfour and Trenaby, I am indebted for many valuable suggestions. To the
first-named gentleman I am also under obligations for the use of the
woodcuts of the symbols of the Sculptured Stones. The Society of
Antiquaries of Scotland have generously contributed the woodcuts of the
Bressay Stone, the Saverough Bell, and the Sword and Scabbard-tip; to
the Society of Antiquaries of London I am indebted for the illustrations
of the Stones of Stennis; to Mr. James Ferguson and Mr. John Murray for
those of Maeshow; to Mr. Thomas S. Muir for the Dragon of Maeshow, the
etchings of the churches of Weir and Lybster, and the ground-plans of
the ancient churches; to Messrs. Chambers for the woodcut of Mousa; and
to Dr. Daniel Wilson and Messrs. Constable for those of the Brooch and
Comb, illustrating the burial-usages of the Norsemen. The view of
Egilsey church is from a photograph, for which I am indebted to Mr.
George Petrie of Kirkwall, whose pleasant companionship in a pilgrimage
among the localities described in the Saga is gratefully remembered.

                                                                   J. A.

         NATIONAL MUSEUM
    OF THE ANTIQUARIES OF SCOTLAND,
         October 1873.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

                                                        PAGE

                I. EARLIEST HISTORICAL NOTICES OF         ix
                     THE ORKNEYS

               II. EARLY CHRISTIANITY OF THE              xi
                     ISLANDS

              III. ARRIVAL OF THE NORTHMEN AND           xxi
                     ESTABLISHMENT OF
                      THE EARLDOM OF ORKNEY AND
                     CAITHNESS

               IV. THE EARLDOM IN THE NORSE LINE,      xxiii
                     872-1231

                V. THE EARLDOM IN THE ANGUS LINE,       xlvi
                     1231-1312

               VI. THE EARLDOM IN THE STRATHERNE          lv
                     LINE, 1321-1379

              VII. THE EARLDOM IN THE LINE OF ST.        lxi
                     CLAIR, 1379-1469

             VIII. THE BISHOPRIC OF ORKNEY,             lxxi
                     1102-1469

               IX. THE BISHOPRIC OF CAITHNESS,         lxxix
                     1150-1469

                X. ANCIENT CHURCHES OF ORKNEY        lxxxvii

               XI. MAESHOW AND THE STONES OF              ci
                     STENNIS

              XII. MOUSA AND THE PICTISH TOWERS          cix

             XIII. REMAINS OF THE NORTHMEN               cxi

                   CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE                  cxxv

                   GENEALOGICAL TABLES                cxxxii


            ORKNEYINGA SAGA.                          1-201
                  APPENDIX                          201-212
                  INDEX                                 213


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                -------

                           ON SEPARATE PAGES.

         View of South Transept and part of Choir Frontispiece
           of the Cathedral of St. Magnus

         Map of Scotland, with Norse names                viii

         The Bressay Sculptured Stone                      xvi

         The Bressay Sculptured Stone, Reverse of         xvii

         Symbols on the Sculptured Stones of               xix
           Scotland

         Cathedral of St. Magnus, Kirkwall,           lxxxviii
           exterior view.

         The Church of Egilsey                            xcii

         Chancel Arch of Church of Weir, and            xcviii
           Chancel Doorway of Church at Lybster,
           Reay

         Map of the Orkney Islands                       cxlii

         Map of the Shetland Islands                     Ibid.

         Dragon-ship of the Viking period                  132


                              IN THE TEXT.

                                                          Page

         Square-sided Iron Bell found at                   xiv
           Saverough, Orkney

         Ground-plan of Egilsey Church and Tower,          xci
           Orkney

         Ground-plan of Round Church at Orphir,           xciv
           Orkney

         Ground-plan of Church at Weir, Orkney            xcvi

         Ground-plan of Church at Lybster, Reay,         xcvii
           Caithness

         Ground-plan and Section of Maeshow,               cii
           Orkney

         View of the Chamber in Maeshow, Orkney           ciii

         Dragon carved on the wall in Maeshow              civ

         Stone Circle at Brogar, Stennis, Orkney           cvi

         Stone Circle at Stennis, and Cromlech,           cvii
           from the northward

         Stone Circle at Stennis, from the                cvii
           westward

         Pictish Tower of Mousa (Moseyarborg),             cix
           Shetland

         Norse Sword found at Gorton, Morayshire          cxvi

         Scabbard-Point found in a Norse Grave in        cxvii
           Westray, Orkney

         Bronze Tortoise Brooch found in a Norse          cxxi
           Grave in Caithness

         Comb found in a Norse Grave in Westray,         cxxii
           Orkney


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       SYLLABUS OF INTRODUCTION.


                                                                  Pages

     I. Early Population of the Orkneys—Monuments and            ix-xi.
          Structural Remains—Saxon Invasion in the 5th
          century—The Orkneys under Pictish rule—Dalriad
          Invasion in the 6th century—Wasting of the
          Orkneys by the Pictish King Bruide.

    II. Visitation of the Islands by Irish                      xi-xxi.
          Clerics—Dicuil’s Account of Iceland, the Faroes,
          Shetland and Orkney—Irish Christian Settlers
          driven away by the Northern Robbers—Indications
          of the early Christianity of the Islands—Bells
          and Christian Monuments of an early Age found in
          the Islands—Art of their early Sculptured
          Stones—Symbols of the Sculptured Monuments of
          the Scottish Mainland: their probable
          Period—Indications of an early Christianity in
          the Norse Topography of the Islands.

   III. Earliest Notices of Northmen on British Shores:      xxi-xxiii.
          their first Inroads on the Irish Coasts; they
          plunder Iona—Establishment of a Norse Kingdom at
          Armagh—Olaf the White, King of Dublin—Harald
          Harfagri’s Expedition to the Orkneys—Subjugation
          of Orkney, Shetland, the Hebrides, and Man.

    IV. Sigurd, first Earl of the Orkneys—Earl Sigurd and   xxiii-xlvi.
          Thorstein the Red subdue Caithness and
          Sutherland—Sigurd’s Death and Burial at
          Ekkialsbakki—Thorstein the Red King of “half of
          Scotland”—Thorstein slain in Caithness—Duncan,
          Earl of Duncansbay—Guttorm Earl—Hallad Earl—Torf
          Einar Earl—Thorfinn Hausakliuf Earl—Ragnhild
          murders her Husbands—Battle at Skida Myre in
          Caithness—Earl Hlödver—Earl Sigurd the
          Stout—Earl Finnleik—Battle at Skida Myre—Earl
          Sigurd’s Raven Banner—Battle at Duncansbay—Earl
          Sigurd marries a Daughter of Malcolm, King of
          Scots: is converted to Christianity by King
          Olaf, Tryggvi’s Son; falls at the Battle of
          Clontarf—Earls Thorfinn, Brúsi, and Einar—Kali
          Hundason takes the Kingdom in Scotland—Battles
          at Deerness and Baefiord—Rögnvald
          Brusison—Battle off Raudabiorg—Earl Thorfinn,
          surprised by Rögnvald, escapes from the burning
          House—Rögnvald slain on Papa Stronsay—Earl
          Thorfinn’s Death—Ingibiorg, his Widow, marries
          King Malcolm Canmore—Battle of Stamford
          Bridge—Expeditions of King Magnus Barelegs to
          Scotland—He carries off the Orkney Earls Paul
          and Erlend, and places his own son Sigurd over
          Orkney—Earl Hakon Palson—Murder of St.
          Magnus—Harald (Slettmali) dies from a poisoned
          Shirt—Paul the Silent—Rögnvald Kolson wins the
          Orkneys—Earl Paul carried off to Athole by Swein
          Asleifson—Harald, Son of Maddad Earl of Athole,
          made joint Earl of Orkney—Earl Rögnvald’s
          Pilgrimage to Jerusalem—Erlend Ungi besieged in
          Mousa by Earl Harald—Earl Rögnvald slain—Earl
          Harald at War with King William the Lion—The
          Eyarskeggiar—Earl Harald makes Peace with King
          Sverrir, and Shetland is taken from him: is
          captured by King William the Lion, and
          imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle; is released on
          his son Thorfinn being given up as a Hostage;
          storms a Borg at Scrabster, and mutilates Bishop
          John—Penance prescribed for the Mutilation of
          the Bishop—Earl John—Burning of Bishop Adam at
          Halkirk—Earl John slain at Thurso

     V. Magnus, son of Gilbride, Earl of Angus, made Earl      xlvi-lv.
          of Caithness and Orkney—Gilbride Earl—Magnus,
          son of Gilbride—King Hakon Hakonson’s expedition
          against Scotland—Battle of Largs—Death of King
          Hakon at Kirkwall: his Body lies in State in the
          Cathedral; is temporarily interred in the Choir;
          is removed to Bergen—Earl Magnus Magnusson—Earl
          John—Marriage of King Eirik of Norway with
          Margaret of Scotland—Death of Queen Margaret—Her
          Daughter Margaret, “the Maid of Norway,” made
          Heiress to the Scottish Throne, and betrothed to
          Prince Edward of England—The Maid of Norway dies
          on her voyage to Scotland—King Eirik marries
          Isabella Bruce—Earl John betrothed to their
          Daughter Ingibiorg—Appearance at Bergen of “the
          False Margaret,” a German woman who gave herself
          out as the Maiden of Norway—The False Margaret
          burnt at Bergen, and her Husband
          beheaded—Magnus, last Earl of the Angus line

    VI. Malise, Earl of Stratherne, succeeds to the             lv-lxi.
          Earldom of Orkney: falls at the Battle of
          Halidon Hill—Forfeiture of the Earldom of
          Stratherne—Malise the Younger goes to Norway:
          marries two of his Daughters to Swedish
          Noblemen—Erngisl Suneson, son-in-law of Malise,
          made Earl of Orkney—Duncan Anderson’s
          Manifesto—Alexander de Ard made Earl of Orkney
          for one Year—Resigns his Lands in Caithness—The
          Stewarts Earls of Caithness—Sir George Crichtoun
          made Earl of Caithness—William St. Clair made
          Earl of Caithness

   VII. First Notices of the St. Clairs in Orkney—Obscure     lxi-lxxi.
          Questions connected with the Succession of the
          St. Clairs—Henry St. Clair made Earl of Orkney
          and Shetland—Malise Sperra slain at
          Scalloway—Henry II. Earl of Orkney—Bishop
          Tulloch made Commissioner for the King of
          Norway—David Menzies made Commissioner: his
          oppressions—William St. Clair, last Earl under
          the Norwegian Dominion—Impignoration of the
          Isles

  VIII. Origin of the Bishopric of Orkney—Bishops of        lxxi-lxxix.
          Orkney consecrated at Hamburg—Bishops of Orkney
          consecrated at York—William the Old, “first
          Bishop”—William II.—Bjarni—Jofreyr—Henry
          I.—Peter—Dolgfinn—William III.—William
          IV.—William V.—Henry II.—John—Patrick—Thomas de
          Tulloch—William de Tulloch—The See of Orkney
          placed under the Metropolitan Bishop of St.
          Andrews

    IX. Earliest Notices of the Bishopric of               lxxix-lxxxvii.
          Caithness—Andrew, first known
          Bishop—John—Adam—Letter of Pope Honorius
          referring to the burning of Bishop Adam—Gilbert
          the Saint—William—Walter—Archibald—Alan—Adam—
          Andrew—Ferquhard—Nicolas—David—Alan—Thomas—
          Malcolm—Alexander—Robert—William.

     X. Cathedral of St. Magnus—Removal of the Relics of    lxxxvii-ci.
          St. Magnus from Christ’s Church in Birsay to St.
          Olaf’s Church in Kirkwall: Transference to the
          Cathedral—Egilsey Church—Munch’s view of the
          Origin of the Name Egilsey—Discussion of the
          probable Age of the Church—Church of Orphir
          built in imitation of the Church of the Holy
          Sepulchre at Jerusalem—Earl Hacon probably its
          Founder—Christ’s Church in Birsay the first
          recorded Christian Church in the Islands—Remains
          of an older Church at the Site of the present
          Parish Church—Church of Weir: Bishop Bjarni
          probably its Founder—Church at Lybster, in Reay,
          Caithness—Church on the Brough of Birsay
          probably twin-towered—Church on the Brough of
          Deerness: Superstitious Practices at it in last
          Century—Old Parish Church of Deerness—Towered
          Churches of Shetland

    XI. Maeshow, the Orkahaug of the Saga—The                 ci-cviii.
          Hogboy—Description of Maeshow—The Runic
          Inscriptions on its Walls—Carved Dragon and
          Cross on its Buttresses—The Jorsala-farer
          s—Names of Persons mentioned in the Saga carved
          on it—The Stones of Stennis—The Ring of
          Brogar—The Ring of Stennis, and Cromlech—The
          Ring of Bookan—Stennis mentioned in the
          Saga—Havard’s teigr—Earl Havard’s Grave-Mound

   XII. Mousa and its Tower—Description of                     cix-cxi.
          Moseyarborg—Number and Distribution of the
          Pictish Towers—Results of recent Excavations in
          them—Condition of the People who lived in
          them—Roman Coins found in them—Notices of the
          Tower of Mousa in the Sagas

  XIII. The Norse Territory in Scotland still               cxi-cxxiii.
          distinguished by its Norse Place-names—Notices
          of the Norse Language in Orkney and
          Shetland—Norse Ballads—The Ballad of Hiluge and
          Hildina recovered by Low in Foula: Outline of
          its Story; its Dialect and Date—Runic Monuments
          in Orkney and Shetland—Actual Relics of the
          Northmen—Burial Customs of the Pagan Northmen in
          Orkney and Shetland—Narrative of an Eye-witness
          of the Incremation of the Body of a Norse Chief
          of the 10th century—Description of the Funeral
          Rites—“The Dead Man’s Angel”—Sacrifice of Oxen,
          Horses, etc.—Slaughter of a Female Slave to
          accompany the Chief—Burning of the Bodies and
          erection of the Grave-Mound—Diversity of the
          Burial Usages—Burial in Stone Urns and Cooking
          Pots—Brooches of a peculiar Scandinavian type
          found with Norse Burials in Scotland—Group of
          Norse Graves in Westray, Orkney


------------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: SKOTLAND EDMONSTON & DOUGLAS, EDINBURGH.]


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             INTRODUCTION.


             I. EARLIEST HISTORICAL NOTICES OF THE ORKNEYS.


The historical notices of the Orkneys previous to the Norse occupation
are few in number, and exceedingly obscure. We learn little more from
the allusions of the Roman writers than that scarcely anything was known
to them with certainty of these remote localities. It may be inferred,
however, that the first wave of Celtic population that overspread the
northern mainland of Britain must have gradually extended northward to
the outlying Isles. The correspondence of the early remains found in the
Islands with those of northern Scotland is of itself a striking
testimony to the connection of their early population with the Celtic
stock of the northern mainland of Scotland. We gather from these remains
that the earliest population of the Islands, of which we have any
reliable evidence, lived in the same manner as the natives of the
northern mainland, fought with the same varieties of weapons of stone
and bronze, erected the same forms of defensive structures, practised
the same funereal rites, and constructed similar forms of sepulchral
chambers, over which they piled the great mounds which are among the
most striking features of an Orkney landscape.[1] The number and
magnitude of these monuments and structural remains bear witness in a
most remarkable manner to the activity, intelligence, and social
organisation of the times that have no other record.

It is not until the middle of the 5th century of the Christian era that
the early chronicles begin to cast occasionally a feeble and uncertain
light upon the history of the northern isles. It is stated in the
“Historia Britonum” of Nennius that the Saxon chiefs Ochtha and Ebissa,
who came over with “forty keels” in the year 449, laid waste the Orkney
Islands, and seized a great many regions beyond the Frisic Sea.[2] At
that time, and for a long period previously (according to Nennius), the
Picts had been in possession of the Orkneys. Whatever value may be
attached to these statements as referring to events which took place 400
years before the author’s own time, there can be no reason for
discrediting his testimony when he says that the Picts continued in
possession of the Orkneys in his day.[3]

Adamnan, in his Life of St. Columba, mentions that the saint being on a
visit to Bruide Mac Meilcon, king of the Northern Picts, at his
stronghold on the river Ness, requested the king to recommend to the
_reguli_ of the Orkneys (one of whom was then present, and whose
hostages were then in the king’s hands) that Cormac and the clerics who
had accompanied him on a missionary voyage to the Orkneys should receive
no harm; and it is added that this was the means of saving them from a
violent death. But if the authority and influence of the king of the
Northern Picts extended to these islands in the reign of Bruide, it does
not seem to have been effectual in protecting them from foreign
invasion. Bruide Mac Meilcon died in 584, and some time before his death
the new and rising power of the Dalriadic kings had made itself felt as
far as the Orkneys. In the Annals of Ulster there is a notice under the
year 580 of an expedition against the Orkneys by Aedan, son of Gabran,
seventh king of the Dalriad Scots, who, coming over from Ireland (then
called Scotia) about the year 503, had established themselves in Argyle
and the Western Highlands, and founded the kingdom of Dalriada. From the
date of Aedan’s expedition in 580 we have no mention of the islands in
the native chronicles for a whole century, and the next entry, which
occurs under the year 682, gives colour to the supposition that they may
have been under Dalriadic rule in the interval. The record in 682 is
simply, that the Orkneys were wasted by Bruide Mac Bile, the king of the
Northern Picts, and apparently brought once more under the rule of the
Northern Pictish kings.


                 II. EARLY CHRISTIANITY OF THE ISLANDS.


It is probable that both the island groups of Orkney and Shetland were
visited at a very early period by wandering clerics of the Irish Church,
whose missionary efforts contributed so much to the diffusion of
Christianity in Scotland. But we have no record of an earlier visitation
than that of the companions of St. Columba, although there are
indications that between that time and the colonisation of the islands
by the heathen Northmen, these Irish clerics were no strangers in any of
the island groups.

The Irish monk Dicuil, who wrote his treatise “De Mensura Orbis
Terrarum” in or about the year 825, states that “thirty years before
that time some clerics had told him that they had lived in an island
which they supposed to be Thule, where at the summer solstice the sun
only hid himself behind a little hill for a short time during the night,
which was quite light; and that a day’s sail towards the north would
bring them from thence into the frozen sea.” This island is obviously
Iceland. He then states that there are many other islands in the
northern British sea, which lie at the distance of two days and two
nights from the northern islands of Britain, in a straight course, and
with a fair wind and a full sail. “One of these,” he says, “a certain
honest monk told me he had visited one summer after sailing a day, a
night, and another day, in a two-benched boat.” These appear to be the
Shetland Islands. Dicuil further states that “there are also some other
small islands, almost all divided from each other by narrow sounds,
inhabited for about a century by hermits proceeding from our Scotia;[4]
but as they had been deserted since the beginning of the world, so are
they now abandoned by these anchorites on account of the Northern
robbers; but they are full of countless sheep, and swarm with sea-fowl
of various kinds. We have not seen these islands mentioned in the works
of any author.” Here the reference to the “small isles separated by
narrow sounds” is distinctive of the Faroes, of which the long narrow
sounds are the peculiar physical feature; while the statement that they
are full of countless sheep, taken in connection with the fact that the
Northmen named them “Sheep-isles” (Fær-eyiar), establishes the identity
of the group which Dicuil describes. The Faroes were colonised by “the
Northern robbers,” led by Grim Kamban, in 825, the very year in which
Dicuil was writing.

The first Norwegian settlement was made in Iceland in 875, by Leif and
Ingulf, who carried with them a number of Irish captives; and the
Landnamabók states that “before Iceland was colonised from Norway, men
were living there whom the Northmen called Papas; they were Christians,
and it is thought they came over the sea from the west, for after them
were found Irish books, and bells, and crosiers, and other things, so
that one could see that they were Westmen: these things were found in
Papey, eastwards, and in Papyli.” Again, in the Islendingabók of Ari
Frodi the same reason is assigned for the departure of the monks as is
given by Dicuil. Ari Frodi also says, speaking of Iceland:—“Christian
men were here then called by the Northmen _Papa_, but afterwards they
went their way, for they would not remain in company with heathens; and
they left behind them Irish books, and bells, and pastoral staves, so
that it was clear that they were Irishmen.”

Thus by the concurrent testimony of Adamnan, the biographer of St.
Columba, himself an abbot of the monastery of Hy; of the Irish monk
Dicuil, writing during the lifetime of the men who had fled from the
Northern robbers; and lastly, of the Icelandic historians themselves—it
is established that the whole of the northern islands were visited by
Christian teachers, and probably, in part at least, converted to the
Christian faith, before they were overrun by the Norwegian invaders, and
the new faith swallowed up in the rising tide of heathenism thrown upon
their shores from the land of Odin and the Aser.

In the absence of all record we cannot expect to ascertain to what
extent these early missionary settlements had succeeded in leavening the
Celtic population of the islands of Orkney and Shetland with the
Christian faith. But it seems probable that during the three centuries
that intervened between the coming of Cormac in his coracle and the
arrival of Harald Harfagri with his fleet of war galleys, the new faith
had been firmly established and widely extended both in the northern
mainland of Scotland and in the remoter isles.

The indications which point to a Christian occupation of the isle, of no
inconsiderable extent and continuance, previous to their occupation by
the Norsemen, are:—The dedications of the early ecclesiastical
foundations; the occurrence of monumental stones sculptured in the style
peculiar to the earliest Christian monuments of the mainland of
Scotland, and bearing inscriptions in the Ogham character; the finding
(as at Saverough and Burrian) of ecclesiastical bells of the
square-sided form, peculiar to the early ages of the Church; and the
occurrence in the Norse topography of the islands of place-names
indicative of the previous settlement of Celtic Christian priests.


[Illustration: SQUARE-SIDED BELL FOUND AT SAVEROUGH, ORKNEY.]


The earliest dedications were probably those to St. Ninian and St.
Columba, St. Brigid, and St. Tredwell. It may be significant that in the
south parish of South Ronaldsay, where in all probability the companions
of St. Columba would make their first landing in Orkney, there were no
fewer than three chapels dedicated to him.[5]

The sculptured monuments furnish us with three collateral lines of
inference, tending to the same conclusion. These inferences are derived
from the inscriptions, the ornamentation, and the symbols of the
monuments.

Two of these monuments bear inscriptions in the Ogham character, a style
of cryptographic writing characteristic of the early inscribed stone
monuments of Ireland, but occurring also in Cornwall, in Wales, and in
Scotland. One of these two was found near the ancient church of
Culbinsbrugh, in the island of Bressay in Shetland. It is a slab of
chlorite slate, 4 feet in length, about 16 inches wide at the top,
tapering to a little less than a foot at the bottom, and about 1¾ inch
thick. It is sculptured on both sides in low relief, and the inscription
is incised on the edges of the stone. On one of its sculptured faces it
bears the Christian emblem of the cross, and among the figures
sculptured on it are those of two ecclesiastics with pastoral staves
(see Plates). The other inscribed stone was found by Dr. William Traill
in the Pictish Tower or “Broch” of Burrian, in North Ronaldsay in
Orkney. The inscription scratched on it has not yet been deciphered. It
also bears the Christian emblem of the cross. The association of the
cross with these Ogham inscriptions[6] points to a period anterior to
the Norse occupation of the islands.


[Illustration: THE BRESSAY STONE. Showing one side and Ogham inscription
on edge.]


[Illustration: THE BRESSAY STONE. Showing the other side and Ogham
inscription on edge.]


In examining the characteristics of the art of these monumental stones,
we are guided to similar conclusions. The Bressay stone bears none of
the symbols peculiar to the Scottish monuments, and in its artistic
features it comes nearer to some of the Irish than to the general style
of the Scottish sculptures. It is sculptured in low relief, while all
the Orkney examples are merely incised. But some of the forms of their
ornamentation are also characteristic of the art of the illuminated
Irish manuscripts of the 7th and 8th centuries, and others are equally
characteristic of the art of the bronzes of what has been styled the
late Celtic period.

The Scottish sculptured monuments scattered over the territory ranging
from the Forth to the Orkneys are characterised by a peculiar set of
symbols of unknown significance, which are often associated with the
Christian emblem of the cross.[7] The symbol which is of most frequent
occurrence, and which may therefore be said to be the most
characteristic of the period of the monuments, is a crescent conjoined
with what has been called a double sceptre, as represented in the first
figure of the accompanying Plate.


[Illustration: SYMBOLS ON THE SCULPTURED STONES OF SCOTLAND.]


This characteristic symbol occurs on a sculptured slab which was found
built into St. Peter’s Church in South Ronaldsay, and which had
evidently formed part of a monument older than the church. It occurs
also on the slab found at Firth, on the mainland of Orkney. Most
singularly, it occurs on the phalangial bone of an ox which was found in
the Broch of Burrian along with the slab previously described as bearing
an Ogham inscription and a peculiar form of cross. It occurs associated
with the same form of cross on the elaborately-sculptured stone at
Ulbster in Caithness. We have this crescent symbol also associated with
the cross on the inscribed stone of St. Vigeans in Forfarshire. This
stone bears the only inscription which is known to have been left to us
in the Pictish language:—[8]

            DROSTEN │ IPE  │ VORET  │     ELT      │ FORCUS
            “Drost, │son of│ Voret, │of the race of│Fergus,”

and is believed to refer to that Drost, king of the Picts, who fell at
the battle of Blathmig, according to the Annals of Tighearnac, in A.D.
729.

The indications afforded by the Norse topography of the Islands, if
taken in connection with the passages previously quoted from the
Landnamabók and the Islendingabók of Ari Frodi regarding the origin of
the names Papa and Papyli in Iceland, require only to be mentioned. The
most obvious of these are the frequency with which the name Papa[9]
occurs both in the topography of Orkney and Shetland, and the occurrence
of such names as St. Ninian’s Isle in Shetland, Rinansey (Ringan’s-ey,
St. Ninian’s Isle) in Orkney, Daminsey, now Damsey (St. Adamnan’s Isle),
and Enhallow (Eyin-Helga, Holy Isle), given, we must suppose,
intelligently by the Norsemen.

Thus, at the very starting-point of their recorded history, we find
indications of Christianity, with suggestions even of its civilisation
and its art shedding their benign influence over the isles.


III. ARRIVAL OF THE NORTHMEN, AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EARLDOM OF ORKNEY
                             AND CAITHNESS.


The earliest notice we have of the visits of the Northmen to the shores
of Britain occurs in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle under the date A.D. 787:—

    “In this year King Beorhtric took Eadburh, King Offa’s daughter, to
    wife. And in his days first came three ships of Northmen from
    Hæretha-land; and then the reeve rode thereto, and would drive them
    to the king’s vill, for he knew not what they were, and they there
    slew him. These were the first ships of Danish men that sought the
    land of the English race.”

As they came from Hæretha-land, now Hördaland, on the west coast of
Norway, they were Norwegians, not Danes.

The Irish Annals and the Welsh Chronicles agree in representing the
first inroads of the Norsemen on the Irish coasts as having commenced in
the year 795. In 798 they plundered Inispatrick of Man and the Hebrides;
in 802, and again in 806, they ravaged Iona, slaying in the latter year
sixty-eight of the monastic family there. In 807 they established
themselves on the mainland of Ireland; and a few years afterwards we
find a Norseman making Armagh the capital of his kingdom.

In 852, Olaf the White, a chieftain descended from the same family as
Harald Harfagri, conquered Dublin, and founded the most powerful and
permanent of the Norse kingdoms in Ireland.

By the victory of Hafursfiord in 872, Harald Harfagri made himself sole
monarch of Norway. Large numbers of the wealthy and powerful odallers,
whom he had dispossessed of their territorial possessions, fled to the
islands of Orkney and Shetland, which, for a full century previous to
this time, had been well known to the Norsemen as the viking station of
the western haf—the rendezvous of the Northern rovers, who swept the
coasts of the Hebrides and swarmed in the Irish Seas. Being fugitives
from their country, and outlaws of the new kingdom which Harald had
succeeded in establishing in Norway, they settled themselves permanently
in the islands. Then they turned their haven of refuge into a base of
operations for retaliatory warfare, harrying the coasts of Norway during
the summer months, and living at leisure in the islands during winter on
the plunder. At length King Harald, irritated by their incessant
ravages, collected a powerful fleet, and visiting Shetland, Orkney, and
the Hebrides, in succession, he swept their coasts clear of the
plunderers, subduing the whole of the Northern and Western islands as
far south as Man.

In this expedition Ivar, a son of Rögnvald, Earl of Moeri, was
killed.[10] In order to recompense Rögnvald for the loss of his son,
King Harald bestowed on him the territory of the subjugated isles of
Orkney and Shetland, with the title of Earl of the Orkneys. Harald seems
to have dealt similarly with the Hebrides, but his conquest of the
vikings in these remote isles was not so complete as in the Orkneys.
Ketil Flatnef (Flat nose), who, according to the Laxdæla Saga, had
emigrated to the Hebrides because he could not resist King Harald in
Norway, had married his daughter Aud to Olaf the White, the powerful
king of Dublin, and had established himself in a kind of independent
sovereignty in the Hebrides; and though he seems to have migrated from
them to Iceland in consequence of King Harald’s expedition, the
continued hostility to King Harald’s rule is evinced by the fact that
the second earl whom he sent to the Hebrides, AsBjörn Skerablesi, was
slain by two relatives of Ketil Flatnef, his wife and daughter taken
captive, and the latter sold as a slave. Rögnvald, however, returned to
his own Earldom in Norway, and made over his newly-acquired possessions
to his brother Sigurd, the “first earl” of the Saga.


              IV. THE EARLDOM IN THE NORSE LINE, 872-1231.


Thorstein the Red, son of Olaf the White, king of Dublin, came then to
the north, and allying himself with Earl Sigurd, they crossed over to
the mainland of Scotland, and subdued Caithness and Sutherland as far as
Ekkialsbakki, and afterwards carried their conquests into Ross and
Moray. In this invasion Earl Sigurd killed Maelbrigd the buck-toothed
(Melbrigda tönn), a Scottish maormor of Ross or Moray; and having tied
his head to his saddle-bow, “the tooth,” which was very prominent,
inflicted a wound on his leg, and the wound inflaming caused the death
of the earl, who was hoy-laid (buried in a mound or cairn) on
Ekkialsbakki.[11] After his death, Thorstein the Red reigned as king
over the conquered districts of Scotland, which at that time, says the
Landnamabók,[12] comprehended “Caithness and Sutherland, Ross and Moray,
and more than the half of Scotland.” The Laxdæla Saga[13] says that in
his engagements with the Scots Thorstein was always successful, “until
at length he became reconciled with the King of the Scots, and obtained
possession of the half of Scotland, over which he became king.” But he
was shortly afterwards slain in Caithness by the treachery of the Scots;
and after his death Aud, his mother, migrated to Iceland. Previous to
her departure she had given Groa, the daughter of Thorstein, in marriage
to Duncan, earl or maormor of Duncansby in Caithness. Thus the Norse
earldom of Caithness passed for a time into the family of one of its
native chiefs. But by the subsequent marriage of Grelauga, the daughter
of Duncan and Groa, with Thorfinn Hausakliuf, son of Torf-Einar, Earl of
Orkney, the Scottish earldom was again added to the earldom of the
Isles.

While Thorstein the Red ruled on the northern mainland of Scotland,
Guttorm, the son of Sigurd Eysteinson, had succeeded to the Orkney
earldom on the death of his father, but after having held it for one
year he died childless.

Meantime, when Rögnvald, Earl of Moeri, heard in Norway of the death of
his brother Sigurd, he obtained a grant of the earldom of Orkney from
King Harald for his own son Hallad. Hallad found the Islands so much
infested by vikings that he soon gave up the earldom in disgust, and
returned to Norway, preferring the life of a farmer to that of an
earl.[14]

Then Rögnvald sent another son, Einar, to take possession of the
earldom. Einar was a man of a different stamp from Hallad. He soon made
his power felt among the western vikings, and freed his possessions
entirely from their ravages. The sons of Harald Harfagri, Halfdan Hálegg
and Guthrod, grew up to be men of great violence. One spring they went
north to Moeri and burnt Earl Rögnvald in his own house with sixty of
his men. Halfdan Hálegg then sailed west to Orkney to dispossess Einar
of the earldom, but having allowed himself to be surprised by Einar, he
was captured in Rinansey, and killed by having a blood-eagle cut on his
back.[15] Harald Harfagri came west, and fined the Orkneys in sixty
marks of gold for the death of his son. Earl Einar offered to the
Bœndr[16] that he would pay the money on condition that he should have
all the odal possessions in the islands—a condition to which they agreed
the more readily, says the Saga, “that all the poorer men had but small
lands, while those who were wealthy said they would redeem theirs when
they pleased.”[17] But the odal lands remained in the possession of the
earl till Einar’s great-grandson, Sigurd Hlödverson, was obliged to buy
the assistance of the odallers against the Scots when hard pressed by
the Scottish earl Finnleik.[18]

When Einar died he left three sons, two of whom, Arnkell and Erlend,
were killed with King Erik Bloodyaxe in England. The third, Thorfinn
Hausakliuf, married Grelauga, daughter of Duncan, earl of Duncansbay,
and thus reunited in the Norse line the two earldoms of Orkney and
Caithness. Earl Thorfinn Hausakliuf left five sons. Arnfinn, the eldest,
who was married to Ragnhild, a daughter of King Erik Bloodyaxe, was
killed by his wife at Myrkhol (Murkle) in Caithness. She then married
Havard, his brother. She soon tired of him, and instigated Einar
Klining, his sister’s son, to kill him. Havard fell in the fray at
Stennis, and was buried there.[19] Ragnhild had promised to marry Einar
if he killed her husband Havard. When the deed was done, however, she
refused to perform her promise, and instigated another Einar, by the
promise of her hand, to slay Einar Klining. This he did, but again
Ragnhild was faithless. Then she married Liot, the third son of Earl
Thorfinn Hausakliffer, and brother of the two husbands whom she had
already had and slain. Meanwhile Skuli, a fourth brother, had gone to
Scotland and obtained an earl’s title for Caithness from the King of
Scots.[20] He was defeated by Liot, and slain in the Dales of Caithness,
and thus Liot became sole earl of Caithness and Orkney. He fell in
battle with a native chieftain, named Magbiód[21] in the Sagas, at Skida
Myre[22] (Skitten) in Caithness, and was succeeded in the earldom by
Hlödver, the last of the five brothers.

Earl Hlödver married Audna, the daughter of the Irish king Kiarval. He
died shortly after his accession to the earldom, and was buried at Hofn
(Huna) in Caithness.[23] His son Sigurd, sometimes called “the Stout,”
succeeded him. He is said to have been a mighty warrior, and to have
driven the Scots completely from Caithness.[24] But he was not left in
undisturbed possession of his Scottish earldom. The Scottish earl or
maormor, Finlay (MacRuari?) invaded Caithness and gave him battle at
Skida Myre, where his uncle Liot had fallen before another Scottish
maormor not long previously. Finlay had so large a force that there were
no less than seven Scotsmen to one of Sigurd’s men, and the Orkneymen
who were with Earl Sigurd were unwilling to fight against such odds.
Then Sigurd offered to restore to the Bœndr their allodial lands, which
they had resigned to Earl Einar, his great-grandfather. By this means,
more than by the charmed raven-banner made for him by his Irish mother,
he obtained the victory. “After this,” says the Njal Saga,[25] “Earl
Sigurd became ruler over these dominions in Scotland, Ross and Moray,
Sutherland and the Dales” (of Caithness), which seem also to include the
old Strathnaver. But his troubles with the Scots were not yet over.
Caithness was invaded by two Scottish maormors, called Hundi and
Melsnati in the Saga.[26] A battle took place at Duncansbay, in which
Melsnati was slain, but Hundi fled, and the Norsemen, learning that
another Scottish earl, Malcolm, was assembling an army at Duncansbay,
gave up the pursuit and returned to Orkney. Afterwards Sigurd became
reconciled to Malcolm, King of the Scots, and obtained his daughter in
marriage.

But the most notable event in the life of Earl Sigurd was that which
befel him as he lay in the harbour of Osmondwall shortly after his
accession to the earldom. Olaf Tryggvason, King of Norway, returning
from a western cruise, happened to run his vessels into the same
harbour, as the Pentland Firth was not to be passed that day. On hearing
that the earl was there he sent for him on board his ship, and told him,
without much parley, that he must allow himself to be baptized, and make
all his people profess the Christian faith. The Flateyjarbók says that
the king took hold of Sigurd’s boy, who chanced to be with him, and
drawing his sword, gave the earl the choice of renouncing for ever the
faith of his fathers, or of seeing his boy slain on the spot. In the
position in which he found himself placed, Sigurd became a nominal
convert, but there is every reason to believe that the Christianity
which was thus forced upon the Islanders was for a long time more a name
than a reality. Nearly twenty years afterwards we find Earl Sigurd
bearing his own raven-banner “woven with mighty spells,” at the battle
of Clontarf, against the Christian king Brian; and Sigurd’s fall was
made known in Caithness by the twelve weird sisters (the Valkyriar of
the ancient mythology) weaving the woof of war:—[27]

                       “The woof y-woven
                        With entrails of men,
                        The warp hardweighted
                        With heads of the slain.”

An incident which occurred just before he set out for Ireland gives a
striking illustration of the fierce manners of the times. King Sigtrygg,
who had come from Dublin to obtain Earl Sigurd’s aid, was being
entertained at the Yule-feast in Earl Sigurd’s hall in Hrossey (the
Mainland of Orkney), and was set on the high seat, having Earl Sigurd on
the one side and Earl Gilli, who had come with him, on the other. Gunnar
Lambi’s son was telling the company the story of the burning of Njal and
his comrades, but giving an unfair version of it, and every now and then
laughing out loud. It so happened that as, in answer to an inquiry of
King Sigtrygg’s how they bore the burning, he was saying that one of
them had given way to tears, one of Njal’s friends, Kari by name, who
had just arrived in Orkney, chanced to come into the hall. Hearing what
was said, Kari drew his sword, and smote Gunnar Lambi’s son on the neck
with such a sharp blow that his head spun off on to the board before the
king and the earls, so that the board was all one gore of blood, and the
earls’ clothing too. Earl Sigurd called out to seize Kari and kill him,
but no man stirred, and some spoke up for him, saying that he had only
done what he had a right to do, and so Kari walked away, and there was
no hue and cry after him.

The battle of Clontarf, in which Earl Sigurd fell, is the most
celebrated of all the conflicts in which the Norsemen were engaged on
this side of the North Sea. “It was at Clontarf, in Brian’s battle,”
says Dasent, “that the old and new faiths met in the lists face to face
for their last struggle,” and we find Earl Sigurd arrayed on the side of
the old faith, though nominally a convert to the new. The Irish account
of the battle[28] describes it as seen from the walls of Dublin, and
likens the carnage to a party of reapers cutting down a field of oats.
Sigurd is described as dealing out wounds and slaughter all around—“no
edged weapon could harm him, and there was no strength that yielded not,
and no thickness that became not thin before him.” Murcadh, son of Brian
Borumha, was equally conspicuous on the side of the Irish. He had thrice
passed through the phalanx of the foreigners, slaying a mail-clad man at
every stroke. Then perceiving Sigurd, he rushed at him, and by a blow of
his right-hand sword, cut the fastenings of his helmet, which fell back,
and a second blow given with the left-hand sword cut into his neck, and
stretched him lifeless on the field. In the Njal Saga the incidents
connected with Earl Sigurd’s death are differently related. His
raven-banner, which was borne before him, was fulfilling the destiny
announced by Audna, when she gave it to him at Skida Myre, that it would
always bring victory to those before whom it was borne, but death to him
who bore it. Twice had the banner-bearer fallen, and Earl Sigurd called
on Thorstein, son of Hall of the Side, next to bear the banner.
Thorstein was about to lift it, when Asmund the White called out, “Don’t
bear the banner, for all they who bear it get their death.” “Hrafn the
Red!” cried Earl Sigurd, “bear thou the banner.” “Bear thine own devil
thyself,” said Hrafn.[29] Then said the earl, “’Tis fittest that the
beggar should bear the bag,” and with that he took up the banner, and
was immediately pierced through with a spear. Then flight broke out
through all the host.

When the news of Earl Sigurd’s death reached Scotland King Malcolm gave
the earldom of Caithness to Thorfinn, his daughter’s son by Sigurd, then
only five years of age, and Sumarlidi, Brúsi, and Einar, Sigurd’s sons
by his former marriage, divided the Orkneys between them. Sumarlidi soon
died, and Einar got his portion. Einar made himself unpopular by the
violence with which he exacted his services from the Bœndr for his
viking expeditions, and was killed by Thorkel Fóstri (Amundi’s son) at
Sandwick, in Deerness. Brúsi then took possession of the whole earldom
of the Orkneys, as Thorfinn had that of Caithness. Thorfinn, however,
claimed a share of the Islands, and as he had the assistance of his
grandfather Malcolm, the King of Scots, Brúsi felt himself unable to
cope with him. He therefore went to Norway to negotiate with King Olaf
Haraldson for a grant of the whole of the earldom of the Islands.
Thorfinn followed him on the same errand, but the king was more than a
match for them both, and the result was that he gave each a third of the
Islands, declaring the third which had belonged to Earl Einar to be
forfeited to himself for the murder of his friend and henchman Eyvind
Urarhorn, whom Einar had slain in revenge for Eyvind’s helping the Irish
king Conchobhar against him at Ulfreksfiord. After Thorfinn’s departure,
however, he gave Brúsi to understand that he was to have the forfeited
third of the earldom, as well as his own third, to enable him to hold
his own against Thorfinn. An arrangement was afterwards made between
Brúsi and Thorfinn that the latter should receive two-thirds of the
Islands on condition of his undertaking the defence of the whole, as
they were at that time much exposed to the predatory incursions of Norse
and Danish vikings.

When Thorfinn’s maternal grandfather, King Malcolm, died, Kali
Hundason[30] took the kingdom in Scotland. He attempted to exact tribute
from Thorfinn for his dominions in the north of Scotland, and failing in
this he sent his sister’s son, Moddan, into Caithness, giving him the
title of Earl. Thorfinn was supported by the inhabitants, however, and
after an unsuccessful attempt to establish himself in Caithness, Moddan
returned to King Kali with the news that Thorfinn was plundering in Ross
and Sutherland. King Kali embarked a considerable force in eleven ships
at Beruvik (apparently Berriedale on the southern frontier of
Caithness), and sent Moddan northwards by land with another division of
his army, intending to enclose Thorfinn in the north-east corner of
Caithness, and attack him from two sides at once. Thorfinn, however, was
aware of the trap laid for him, and retired to the Islands. There Kali
came up with him off Deerness, in Orkney, and a fierce battle took
place, in which Kali was defeated. He fled southwards, and Thorfinn,
following him, obliged him again to give battle at Baefiord, where he
was again defeated, while Thorkel Fóstri fell upon Moddan at Thurso and
slew him. Then, say the Sagas, Earl Thorfinn overran Scotland as far
south as Fife, burning and slaying, and subduing the land wherever he
went. By these conquests he became the most powerful of all the Earls of
Orkney.

Rögnvald Brusison was in Norway when he heard of his father’s death, and
being odal-born to his father’s third of the Islands, and having
received from King Magnus Olafson a grant of that third which King Olaf
had declared forfeited to himself for Eyvind Urarhorn’s murder, he went
west to the Orkneys, prepared to maintain his rights against the claims
of Thorfinn, who had taken possession of the whole. An amicable
arrangement was made between the kinsmen, and they joined their forces
for viking forays upon the Hebrides, venturing even upon an extensive
foray in England during the absence of Hardicanute in Denmark. After an
eight years’ alliance, however, discord broke out between the kinsmen,
and in a sea-fight in the Pentland Firth, off Rauda Biorg,[31] in
Caithness, Rögnvald was defeated and fled, and Thorfinn reduced the
whole of the Islands. Rögnvald went to Norway, and stayed some time with
King Magnus. Then he came west to the Islands in a single ship, and
surprising Thorfinn in a house on the Mainland of Orkney, he set fire to
it. Thorfinn broke down part of the wall of the house and leapt out,
carrying his wife Ingibiorg in his arms, and escaped through the smoke.
Rögnvald, believing that Thorfinn had perished, took possession of the
Islands. Thorfinn, who had got secretly over to his dominions in
Caithness, returned shortly afterwards, and surprising Rögnvald in a
house on Papa Stronsay, burnt the house and all who were in it, except
Rögnvald, who sprang over the heads of the men who surrounded him, and
got away in the darkness. He concealed himself among the rocks by the
shore, but was discovered by the barking of his dog, and slain by
Thorkel Fóstri. Thus Thorfinn was again sole ruler of the Orkney
earldom, as well as that of Caithness. He went to Norway to make his
peace with King Magnus, who was foster-brother to Earl Rögnvald, and
therefore would seek vengeance for his death. At that time Magnus was at
war with Swein Ulfson, King of Denmark. While he lay with his fleet at
Seley two war-ships rowed up to the king’s vessel, and a man in a white
cloak went straight aboard, and up to the quarter-deck, where the king
sat at meat. Saluting the king, the man reached forth his hand, took a
loaf from the table, broke it, and ate of it. The king handed the cup to
him when he saw that he had broken bread at his table, and then he
learned that it was Earl Thorfinn, who, having broken his bread and
drunk from his cup, was, for the present at least, safe from his
vengeance, according to the ancient laws of hospitality. He deemed it
wise, however, to take his departure without having obtained a formal
reconciliation. King Magnus died shortly afterwards, and was succeeded
by his uncle Harald Hardradi. Thorfinn again went to Norway on hearing
of King Magnus’ death, and effected a reconciliation with King Harald,
so that he was now established in the earldom of Orkney by consent of
the over-lord, the King of Norway.

From Norway he went to Denmark, visiting King Swein at Aalborg, and
proceeded thence through Germany on a pilgrimage to Rome, where he
obtained absolution for all his deeds. After his return from Rome it is
said that he turned his mind more to the government of his dominions and
the welfare of his people than he had previously done in his career of
conquest. He built Christ’s Kirk in Birsay, and established there the
first bishop’s see in the Orkneys. He died in 1064, having been Earl, by
the Saga account, for “seventy winters,” and the most powerful and
wide-landed of all the Earls of the Orkneys. After his death, as the
Saga states, his widow Ingibiorg was married to King Malcolm
Canmore,[32] and became the mother of Duncan, whom, however, the
Scottish historians have always represented as a bastard.

Thorfinn was succeeded by his two sons, Paul and Erlend, who were with
King Harald Hardradi in his unfortunate expedition to England. After the
battle of Stamford Bridge, in which King Harald fell, the Orkney earls
were allowed to go home by the victorious Harold Godwinson, and they
ruled their dominions jointly in great harmony till their sons grew up
to manhood, when there began to be discord between the families. Hakon,
the son of Paul, was of a turbulent and overbearing disposition. He
seems to have had a lingering attachment to the Pagan faith of his
forefathers, for, while in Sweden (which was longer in being converted
to Christianity than Norway), he is said to have sought out the Pagan
spaemen to learn his future from them. Coming to Norway he tried hard to
induce King Magnus Barelegs to undertake an expedition to the Orkneys
and the Western Isles, hoping that the king would conquer the Islands
for the glory of the conquest, and hand them over to him, as Harald
Harfagri had given them to Rögnvald, Earl of Mœri. He was more
successful than he anticipated. King Magnus, fired with the love of
conquest, did make the expedition, but he deposed Paul and Erlend, and
carried them to Norway, placing his own son Sigurd, a mere child, over
the Orkneys.

Although the Saga speaks as if there had been only one expedition by
King Magnus to Scotland, there were in reality three. Fordun[33] states
that when Donald Bane, Duncan, and Edgar, were struggling for the
kingdom on the death of Malcolm in 1093, King Magnus was ravaging the
gulfs of the Scottish seaboard, and it is stated in the Saga[34] that he
assisted Murcertach in the capture of Dublin in 1094. In his second
expedition in 1098 he carried off the Earls Paul and Erlend, and made
his own son Sigurd Earl of Orkney. Munch surmises that the motives of
this expedition were two-fold—to secure his power in the Orkneys, and to
assist his protégé Donald Bane, who had again usurped the crown of
Scotland on the death of Duncan in 1095, and was in 1097 hard pressed by
Edgar with an English army. King Magnus took with him from the Orkneys
Magnus Erlend’s son (afterwards St. Magnus), and proceeded southwards to
the Hebrides, where he ravaged Lewis, Skye, Uist, Tiree, and Mull,
sparing Iona on account of its sanctity. The Saga says that he opened
the door of the little church of Columbkill (St. Oran’s chapel), and was
about to enter, but stopped suddenly, closed the door, forbade any one
to enter, and gave the inhabitants peace. Then he went on to Isla and
Kintyre, and thence to Man and Anglesea, where he fought the battle with
the two Hughs, Earls of Chester and Shrewsbury. On his return northward
he caused his vessel to be drawn across the isthmus of Tarbert, in
imitation of the fabulous sea-king Beite, of whom a similar story is
told. He returned to Norway in 1099, and during the next two years was
occupied with the Swedish war. In 1102 he returned to the west, married
his son Sigurd to Biadmynia, the daughter of Murcertach, and fell in a
skirmish with the Irish in Ulster in 1103. He was buried in St.
Patrick’s church in Down.[35]

Sigurd, the son of King Magnus, remained Earl of the Orkneys until his
father’s death, when he succeeded to the throne of Norway.

Hakon Paul’s son, and Magnus Erlend’s son, then succeeded to the
earldom, and held it jointly until Magnus was murdered in Egilsey by
Hakon on the 16th April, A.D. 1115.[36]

After the murder of Magnus, Hakon became sole earl. He went on a
pilgrimage to Rome and the Holy Land, and after his return became a good
ruler, and was so popular “that the Orkneymen desired no other rulers
than Hakon and his issue.”

Earl Hakon left two sons, Harald and Paul (the silent). Harald, who had
succeeded to the earldom of Caithness, which “he held from the King of
Scots,” was in some way unintentionally put to death by his mother Helga
and her sister Frákork. As the Saga tells the story, he met his death by
insisting on putting on a poisoned shirt which the sisters intended for
his half-brother Paul, who, on Harald’s death, became sole Earl of the
Orkneys.

A new claimant arose, however, in the person of Kali, son of Kol, a
nobleman resident at Agdir, in Norway, who had married a sister of Earl
Magnus the saint. Kali received from King Sigurd the gift of half the
Orkneys, which had belonged to his uncle Magnus, and his name was
changed from Kali Kolson to Rögnvald, because his mother said that
Rögnvald Brusison was the most accomplished of all the Earls of Orkney,
and thought the name would bring her son good fortune.

Rögnvald had many romantic adventures in the prosecution of his attempt
to obtain possession of half of the earldom held by Paul, which are
detailed at length in the Saga. At last he was advised by his father Kol
to make a vow to St. Magnus, that if he should succeed in establishing
himself in the Orkneys he would build and endow a “stone minster” at
Kirkwall, dedicated to St. Magnus, “to whom the half of the earldom
rightly belonged.” The vow was made, and Rögnvald’s next expedition was
successful. He landed in Shetland, and by a dexterous stratagem the
beacons on Fair Isle and in the Orkneys were made to give a false alarm
of his descent upon the Orkneys, so that when he did land there he was
unopposed. Then he secured the intervention of the bishop, and an
agreement that he should have half the Islands was concluded between him
and Earl Paul. Shortly thereafter Earl Paul was captured by Swein
Asleifson, a notable leader at that time in the Islands, and the last
and greatest of the Orkney vikings. Swein carried the earl off in his
vessel, and, landing him on the southern shore of the Moray Firth,
delivered him into the safe keeping of Maddad, Earl of Athole,[37] who
was married to Margaret, a sister of Earl Paul. What became of the earl
is not known, “but this,” says the Saga, “is well known, that he came
never again to the Orkneys, and had no dominions in Scotland.” Swein
Asleifson returned to Orkney, and by the joint consent of Earl Rögnvald,
Bishop William of Orkney, and Bishop John of Athole, Harald, the son of
Maddad, earl of Athole, was made Earl, along with Rögnvald, though he
was at that time a child of only five years old. This arrangement was
afterwards confirmed by a meeting, held in Caithness, of the Bœndr and
chiefs of the Orkneys and Caithness.

The Earls Rögnvald and Harald visited King Ingi by invitation at Bergen,
and there Earl Rögnvald met with Eindridi Ungi, a returned Crusader, and
became possessed by a strong desire to visit the Holy Land. On his
return voyage to Orkney, Earl Rögnvald was shipwrecked at Gulberwick in
Shetland, and narrowly escaped with his life. Bishop William strongly
approved of his project to go on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and
agreed to accompany him. Accordingly he went back to Norway to organise
the expedition, and returned to the Orkneys followed by a large number
of Jorsala-farers—mostly adventurers of very indifferent character, if
we are to judge by their turbulent and lawless behaviour during their
stay in the Orkneys, where they spent the winter previous to their
departure for the East. Early in the spring of the year 1152 Earl
Rögnvald called a Thing-meeting of the inhabitants of the Islands, and
told them of his purposed voyage, announcing that he was to leave the
sole government in the hands of Harald during his absence, and asking
them all to obey him and help him faithfully as their lawful lord. The
summer was far advanced before he sailed, but he had a prosperous
voyage, the adventures of which are detailed in the Saga; and after
visiting Jerusalem and bathing in the Jordan, he returned by way of
Constantinople, Durazzo, Apulia, and Rome, and so overland to Norway,
the whole expedition occupying about three years.

In the same summer that Earl Rögnvald left the Orkneys on his
pilgrimage, King Eystein came from Norway with a large force, and
seizing Earl Harald Maddadson as he lay at Thurso with a single ship,
made him pay a ransom of three marks of gold, and swear fealty to him
for Orkney and Shetland. Earl Maddad of Athole was now dead, and
Margaret, the mother of Earl Harald, had come to the Orkneys. Erlend,
the son of the Earl Harald (Slettmali), who was killed by the poisoned
shirt, had set up his claim to half the earldom after Rögnvald’s
departure. His cause was favoured by King Eystein, and espoused by Swein
Asleifson, and Earl Harald was obliged to make peace by taking oath to
allow Erlend to remain in possession of the Islands, an arrangement
which was afterwards confirmed by a Thing-meeting of the Bœndr of the
Orkneys, Earl Rögnvald’s claim to his share of the Islands being,
however, reserved. Earl Harald (Maddadson) was thus denuded of all power
in the Islands. He fled across to Caithness, but after a time he
returned to the Orkneys with four ships and a hundred men, and after an
unsuccessful attempt to surprise Erlend[38] he was obliged to abandon
the enterprise for a time. Meanwhile, Erlend had carried off Harald’s
mother Margaret (who seems to have been still a beautiful woman, though
of very indifferent character), and fled with her to the island of Mousa
in Shetland, where they fortified themselves in the old Pictish tower or
borg of Mousa, which about two centuries before had given shelter during
a whole winter to a pair of lovers from Norway, under circumstances
somewhat similar.[39] Harald pursued them, and laid siege to the borg,
which could not be taken by assault, but the two earls came to a mutual
understanding, and the siege was abandoned. Erlend married Margaret, and
the same summer he and Harald went each on a visit to Norway to meet
Earl Rögnvald on his return from the Holy Land.

Erlend succeeded in making an alliance with Earl Rögnvald. Earl Harald
was not aware of this till he returned from Norway, and heard the news
in Orkney. He and Rögnvald met at Thurso, and a skirmish took place
between their respective followers, in which thirteen of Rögnvald’s men
were slain, but by the efforts of their mutual friends the two earls
were brought to an agreement of peace. Erlend and his faithful ally
Swein Asleifson surprised the squadron of the two earls at Scapa, taking
fourteen ships, and putting both the earls to flight. They crossed over
to Caithness during the night, each in a separate boat, and returning
some time after with a fresh force, they surprised Erlend in Damsey, and
slew him. Then they made peace with Erlend’s old ally, Swein Asleifson,
although this was not effected without some difficulty. Harald and
Rögnvald then ruled the two earldoms jointly, and apparently in great
harmony, until the death of the latter in 1158. Rögnvald was slain at
Calder, in Caithness, by Thorbiörn Klerk, the former friend and
counsellor of Earl Harald, who had been made an outlaw by Earl Rögnvald
for a murder committed in Kirkwall, following on a series of acts of
violence.[40]

Earl Harald Maddadson now became sole ruler of the earldoms of Orkney
and Caithness. But by his second marriage he had allied himself with
Hoarflad (Gormlath), daughter of Malcolm MacHeth, the so-called Earl of
Moray, ex-bishop Wimund, and pretender to the Scottish throne, and
consequently there could be no pacific relations between him and King
William the Lion. The events of this period are somewhat confusedly told
in the chronicles, but it seems probable that Harald was one of the six
earls who rebelled against King Malcolm in 1160, in order to place
William of Egremont, grandson of Duncan, on the throne,[41] and that he
also supported Donaldbane, the son of William who aspired to the throne,
and from 1180 maintained himself in Moray and Ross, till he was slain at
the battle of Macgarvey, 1187.[42] When Harald Ungi, son of Eirik
Slagbrellir, by Ingigerd (or Ingirid), daughter of Earl Rögnvald,
appeared as a rival claimant to the earldom of Orkney, having received
from King Magnus Erlingson a grant of his grandfather’s share of the
Islands, King William embraced his interests, and gave him a grant of
half of Caithness, which was thus taken from Earl Harald. Then Earl
Harald became involved in difficulties with his other suzerain, the
reigning King of Norway, through the expedition of the Eyarskeggiar or
partisans of Sigurd, son of Magnus Erlingson, whom they endeavoured to
place upon the throne in opposition to King Sverrir. Sigurd’s cause was
largely espoused by the Orkneymen, and the expedition (which was
organised and fitted out in Orkney) did much mischief in Norway. Earl
Harald was obliged to present himself before King Sverrir in Bergen. He
went from Orkney accompanied by Bishop Bjarni. In presence of a great
assembly in the Christ’s Kirk garth, the earl confessed his fault,
saying that he was now an old man, as his beard bore witness; that he
had bent the knee before many kings, sometimes in closest friendship,
but oftener in circumstances of misfortune; that he had not been
unfaithful to his allegiance, although some of his people might have
done that which was contrary to the king’s interests; and that he had
not been always able to rule the Orkneys entirely according to his own
will; and that now he came to yield up himself and all his possessions
into the king’s power. So saying, he advanced, and casting himself to
the earth, he laid his head at King Sverrir’s feet. The king granted him
pardon, but took from him the whole of Shetland,[43] “which never after
that formed part of the Norwegian earldom of Orkney,” though after the
time of the Saga-writer, Shetland as well as Orkney was granted to Henry
St. Clair in 1379 by King Hakon Magnusson, the second of that name.

Yet though humiliated in this manner, and stripped of a great part of
his dominions, Earl Harald, according to Hoveden, dared to contest the
possession of Moray with King William, instigated no doubt by his wife,
in whose right alone he could have had any feasible claim to its
possession.

Roger de Hoveden, chaplain to Henry II., a contemporary chronicler, thus
records the events that followed:—[44]

“In the same year (1196) William, King of Scots, having gathered a great
army, entered Moray to drive out Harald MacMadit, who had occupied that
district. But before the king could enter Caithness, Harald fled to his
ships, not wishing to risk a battle with the king. Then the King of
Scots sent his army to Turseha (Thurso), the town of the aforesaid
Harald, and destroyed his castle there. But Harald, seeing that the king
would completely devastate the country, came to the king’s feet and
placed himself at his mercy, chiefly because of a raging tempest in the
sea, and the wind being contrary, so that he could not go to the
Orkneys; and he promised the king that he would bring to him all his
enemies when the king should again return to Moray. On that condition
the king permitted him to retain a half of Caithness, and the other half
he gave to Harald, the younger, grandson of Reginald (Rögnvald), a
former Earl of Orkney and Caithness. Then the king returned to his own
land, and Harald to the Orkneys. The king returned in the autumn to
Moray, as far as Ilvernarran (Invernairn), in order to receive the
king’s enemies from Harald. But though Harald had brought them as far as
the port of Lochloy near Invernairn, he allowed them to escape; and when
the king returned late from hunting, Harald came to him, bringing with
him two boys, his grandchildren, to deliver them to the king as
hostages. Being asked by the king where were the king’s enemies whom he
had promised to deliver up, and where was Thorfinn his son, whom he had
also promised to give as a hostage, he replied, ‘I allowed them to
escape, knowing that if I delivered them up to you they would not escape
out of your hands. My son I could not bring, for there is no other heir
to my lands.’ So, because he had not kept the agreement which he had
made with the king, he was adjudged to remain in the king’s custody
until his son should arrive and become a hostage for him. And because he
had permitted the king’s enemies to escape, he was also adjudged to have
forfeited those lands which he held of the king. The king took Harald
with him to Edinburgh Castle, and laid him in chains until his men
brought his son Thorfinn from the Orkneys; and on their delivering him
up as a hostage to the king, Harald was liberated.

“So Harald returned to Orkney, and there remained in peace and quiet,
until Harald the younger, having received a grant of the half of the
Orkneys from Sverrir Birkebein, the King of Norway, joined himself to
Sigurd Murt, and many other warriors, and invaded Orkney. Harald the
elder, being unwilling to engage with him in battle, left the Orkneys
and fled to the Isle of Man. He was followed by Harald the younger, but
Harald the elder had left Man before his arrival there, and gone by
another way to the Orkneys with his fleet, and there he killed all the
adherents of the younger Harald whom he found in the Islands. Harald the
younger returned to Caithness to Wick, where he engaged in battle with
Harald the elder, and in that battle Harald the younger and all his army
were slain. Harald the elder then went to the King of Scots, on the safe
conduct of Roger and Reginald, the bishops of St. Andrews and
Rosemarkie, and took to the king a large sum in gold and silver for the
redemption of his lands of Caithness. The king said he would give him
back Caithness if he would put away his wife (Gormlath), the daughter of
Malcolm MacHeth, and take back his first wife, Afreka, the sister of
Duncan, Earl of Fife, and deliver up to him as a hostage Laurentius his
priest,[45] and Honaver the son of Ingemund, as hostages. But this
Harald was unwilling to do; therefore came Reginald, son of Sumarlid,
King of Man and the Isles, to William, King of Scots, and purchased from
him Caithness, saving the king’s annual tribute.”

Reginald, being supplied with auxiliary forces from Ireland by his
brother-in-law, John of Courcy, overran Caithness, and, returning home,
left the conquered earldom in charge of three deputies. Harald procured
the murder of one of them, and then, coming over from Orkney with a
strong force, landed at Scrabster, where the bishop met him and
endeavoured to mollify him. But Harald had a special grudge against
Bishop John, which added to his rage at what he considered the defection
of his Caithness subjects. The bishop had refused to collect from the
people of Caithness a tax of one penny annually from each inhabited
house, which Earl Harald had some years previously granted to the papal
revenues. Accordingly he stormed the “borg” at Scrabster, in which the
bishop and the principal men of the district had taken refuge, slew
almost all that were in it, and caused the bishop to be blinded and his
tongue to be cut out.[46] The two remaining deputies of King Reginald
fled to the King of Scots, whose first act was to take revenge on
Harald’s son Thorfinn. He was blinded and castrated after the barbarous
manner of the times, and died miserably in the dungeon of Roxburgh
Castle. King William, then collecting a great army, marched north to
Eysteinsdal on the borders of Caithness in the spring of 1202. Though
Harald had collected a force of 6000 men, he felt himself unable to cope
with the king, and was obliged to sue for peace, which was obtained on
the hard condition of the payment of every fourth penny to be found in
Caithness, amounting to 2000 marks of silver.

Earl Harald’s career was now drawing to a close. He died in 1206, at the
advanced age of seventy-three, having had the earldom for twenty years
jointly with Earl Rögnvald, and forty-eight years after Rögnvald’s
death.

His sons John and David succeeded him, and ruled jointly for seven
years, when David died and John became sole Earl of Orkney and
Caithness. The most notable event of his time was the burning of Bishop
Adam at Halkirk in Caithness.

Bishop Adam was a man of low birth. According to the Saga he was a
foundling, and had been exposed at a church door. Previous to his
consecration to the see of Caithness, in 1214, he had been Abbot of
Melrose.[47] He arbitrarily increased the exaction of the bishop’s seat
to such an extent that the populace rose in a body, and proceeding
tumultuously to Halkirk, where he was residing, demanded abatement of
the unjust exactions. Earl John, who was in the neighbourhood at the
time, declined to interfere, and the exasperated populace, finding the
bishop indisposed to treat them more liberally, first killed his
adviser, Serlo, a monk of Newbottle, and then burnt the bishop. In the
quaint language of Wyntoun—

               “Thre hundyre men in cumpany
                Gaddyrt on hym suddanly,
                Tuk hym owt quhare that he lay
                Of his chawmyre befor day,
                Modyr naked hys body bare;
                Thai band hym, dang hym, and woundyt sair
                In-to the nycht or day couth dawe.
                The monk thai slwe thare, hys falawe,
                And the child that in hys chawmyr lay,
                Thare thai slwe hym before day.
                Hymself bwndyn and wowndyt syne
                Thai pwt hym in hys awyn kychyne,
                In thair felny and thare ire
                Thare thai brynt hym in a fyre.”

The Saga tells that when the tidings of this outrage reached King
Alexander he was greatly enraged, and that the terrible vengeance he
took was still fresh in memory when the Saga was written. Fordun states
that the king had the perpetrators of this deed mangled in limb and
racked with many a torture. The Icelandic Annals are more precise. They
say that he caused the hands and feet to be hewn from eighty of the men
who had been present at the burning, and that many of them died in
consequence.

With this tragic and ill-omened event the chequered history of the line
of the Norse Earls draws to a close. Earl John sought to clear himself
from the guilt of complicity in the murder of the bishop by the
testimony of “good men” that he had no hand in it; but seeing that he
had neither assisted the bishop nor sought to punish his murderers, he
was heavily fined by King Alexander, and deprived of part of his
Scottish earldom. Subsequently he had an interview with the king at
Forfar, and bought back his lands. In the summer of 1224 he was summoned
by King Hakon to Norway, having fallen under suspicion of a desire to
aid the designs of Earl Skule against Hakon’s power in Norway; and after
a conference with the king at Bergen he returned to Orkney, leaving his
only son Harald behind him as a hostage. In 1226 Harald was drowned at
sea, probably on his passage home from Norway. In 1231, Earl John having
become involved in a feud with Hanef Ungi, a commissioner whom King
Hakon had sent over to the Orkneys, Snækoll Gunnason, grandson of Earl
Rögnvald (Kali Kolson), and Aulver Illteit, they attacked him suddenly
in an inn at Thurso, set fire to the house, and slew him in the cellar,
where he had sought to conceal himself.

Thus the ancient line of the Norse Earls, that had ruled the Orkneys
since 872—a period of 350 years—became extinct, and the earldom passed
into the possession of the house of Angus.


              V. THE EARLDOM IN THE ANGUS LINE—1231-1312.


On the failure of the line of the Norse Earls by the death of Earl John
in 1231, King Alexander II. of Scotland, in 1232, granted the earldom of
North Caithness to Magnus,[48] the second son of Gilbride, Earl of
Angus. Sutherland, or the southern land of Caithness, was now made a
separate earldom, and given to William, son of Hugh Freskyn, who was
thus the first of the Earls of Sutherland.

Magnus seems to have been confirmed in the earldom of Orkney by the King
of Norway; but from this time the notices of Orkney and its earls in the
Icelandic or Norwegian records are so few and obscure, that but little
is to be gathered from them. The Iceland Annals, however, record the
death of Magnus, Earl of Orkney, in 1239.

In the Diploma of Bishop Thomas Tulloch, drawn up _circa_ 1443,[49] it
is stated that this Magnus was succeeded by Earl Gilbride, to whom
succeeded Gilbride his son, who held both the earldoms of Orkney and
Caithness in Scotland. The Annals only notice one Gilbride, whom they
call “Gibbon, Earl of Orkney.” His death is placed in the year 1256.

According to the Diploma, Gilbride had one son, Magnus, and a daughter,
Matilda. This Magnus is mentioned in the Saga of Hakon Hakonson as
accompanying the ill-fated expedition of that monarch against Scotland
in 1263. “With King Hakon from Bergen went Magnus, Earl of Orkney, and
the king gave him a good long-ship.” Pilots had previously been procured
from the Orkneys, and the fleet, after being two nights at sea with a
gentle wind, put into Bressay Sound in Shetland, where they remained
nearly half a month. Then they sailed for the Orkneys, and lay for some
time in Elwick Bay, opposite Inganess, near Kirkwall. Then they moved
round South Ronaldsay, and lay some time in Ronaldsvoe, while men were
sent over to Caithness to levy a contribution from the inhabitants,[50]
of which the scald sings that “he imposed tribute on the dwellers on the
Ness, who were terrified by the steel-clad exactor of rings.” Ordering
the Orkneymen to follow him as soon as they were ready, the king sailed
south to Lewis and Skye, where he was joined by Magnus, King of Man. The
fleet, which now consisted of more than a hundred vessels, for the most
part large and all well equipped, was divided into two squadrons, one of
which, consisting of fifty ships, plundered the coasts of Kintyre and
Mull, rejoining King Hakon at Gigha. A detached squadron now plundered
Bute, and the fleet cast anchor in Arran Sound, from which King Hakon
sent Gilbert, Bishop of Hamar, and Henry, Bishop of Orkney, with three
other envoys, to treat for peace with the Scottish King. The
negotiations failed, and soon after the fleet was disabled by a storm,
and the power of the Norwegian King utterly broken in the battle of
Largs. King Hakon, gathering together the shattered remnants of his
fleet and army, retired slowly northwards, meeting with no impediment
until they arrived off Durness, in Sutherlandshire, when the wind fell
calm, and the fleet steered into the sound, where seven men of a boat’s
crew, who had been sent ashore for water, were killed by the Scots. In
passing through the Pentland Firth one vessel went down with all on
board in the “Swelkie,” a dangerous whirlpool in certain states of the
tide, and another was carried by the current helplessly through the
Firth, and made straight for Norway. King Hakon laid up his fleet in
Midland Harbour and Scapa Bay. He then rode to Kirkwall, and lay down to
die. He was lodged in the bishop’s palace, and after having been
confined to his bed for some days, he recovered so much that he attended
mass in the bishop’s chapel, and walked to the cathedral to visit the
shrine of St. Magnus. But there came a relapse, and he was again laid
prostrate. He caused the Bible and Latin books to be read to him to
beguile the tedium of the sick bed, until he was no longer able to bear
the fatigue of reflecting on what he heard; and then he desired that
Norwegian books should be read to him night and day—first the Sagas of
the Saints, and then the Chronicles of the Kings, from Halfdan the Black
through all the succession of the Kings of Norway. Then he set his
affairs in order, caused his silver plate to be weighed out to pay his
troops, and received the sacrament. He died at midnight on Saturday,
15th December 1263. On Sunday the corpse, clothed in the richest
garments, with a garland on the head, was laid in state in the upper
hall of the palace. The king’s chamberlains stood round it with tapers,
and all day long the people came to view the remains of their king. The
nobles kept watch over the bier through the night; and on Monday the
royal remains were borne to St. Magnus’ Cathedral, where they lay in
state all that night. On Tuesday they were temporarily interred in the
choir of the church, near the steps leading to the shrine of St. Magnus.
Before his death the king had given directions that his body should be
carried east to Norway, and buried beside the remains of his father and
his relatives in Bergen. In the month of March the corpse was exhumed
and conveyed to Scapa, where it was placed on board the great ship in
which he had sailed on the unfortunate expedition to Largs, and taken to
Bergen, where it was interred in the choir of Christ’s Church.

Magnus Gilbride’s son, who was Earl of Orkney at the time of King
Hakon’s expedition, died (according to the Annals) in 1273.

He was succeeded by a son of the same name. The Annals have the entry
under the year 1276:—“Magnus, King of Norway, gave to Magnus, son of
Earl Magnus of Orkney, the title of Earl, at Tunsberg.” He appears also
as Earl of Orkney in the document, dated 5th February 1283, declaring
Margaret, the Maiden of Norway, the nearest heir to the Scottish
throne.[51] The death of Earl Magnus, Magnus’ son, is recorded in the
year 1284,[52] along with that of Bishop Peter of Orkney and Sturla the
Lawman. The Diploma states that he died without issue, and was succeeded
by his brother John in the earldom of Orkney and Caithness.

John, as Earl of Caithness, appears in 1289 as one of the signatories to
the letter addressed by the nobles to King Edward of England proposing
that the young Prince Edward should marry Margaret, the Maid of Norway.
His name also occurs in the list of those summoned to attend the first
parliament of Balliol. He swore fealty to King Edward at Murkle in
Caithness, in 1297.

King Eirik of Norway in 1281 had married the Scottish princess Margaret,
daughter of Alexander III. She died in 1283, leaving one daughter,
Margaret, “the Maid of Norway,” who became sole heiress to the crown of
Scotland, and in 1289 was formally betrothed to Prince Edward of
England. She died at sea off the coast of Orkney,[53] on her way to
Scotland, in September or October 1290. There is no record of the
circumstances of her death,[54] but we learn from a letter of Bishop
Audfinn of Bergen,[55] written twenty years after the event in
connection with the case of the false Margaret, who was burned at Bergen
in 1301 (as will be detailed hereafter), that her remains were brought
back to Bergen in charge of the Bishop (most probably of the Orkneys)
and Herr Thore Hakonson, whose wife, Ingibiorg Erlingsdatter, was
Margaret’s attendant on the voyage. In 1293 Eirik married Isabel, who is
styled in the Iceland Annals “daughter of Sir Robert, son of Robert,
Earl of Brus.”[56] It appears that on the 24th of July of that year King
Edward gave permission to Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick, the father of
Isabella Bruce, to go to Norway,[57] and to remain there for a time; and
Munch, the Norwegian historian, conjectures that he had then brought
over his daughter, and stayed till the marriage took place,[58] and that
King Eirik may have hoped by this alliance to bring the crown of
Scotland once more into the possession of a branch of his own royal
line. In 1297 Isabella bore him a daughter named Ingibiorg. King Eirik
died 13th July 1299, and was succeeded by his brother Hakon (Magnusson).

John, Earl of Orkney, seems to have gone to Norway to take the oath of
allegiance to King Hakon immediately after his accession, for we find in
the Icelandic Annals that he was betrothed to King Eirik’s daughter in
1299. The statement is explicit, and though it may seem strange to us
that an infant scarcely two years of age should be betrothed to a man of
forty, Munch makes the remark that such unlikely contracts were by no
means so unusual in those days as to oblige us to discredit the
statement. In fact, we find this same King Hakon betrothing his own
daughter when an infant of one year to a man who, though he was much
younger than Earl John, was nevertheless a full-grown man. But Earl John
seems to have died shortly after the betrothal, for we find that
Ingibiorg was betrothed anew in 1311, and John’s successor in the
earldom appears on record in 1312, with Ferquhard, Bishop of Caithness,
witnessing the confirmation by King Robert I. and Hakon V. (at
Inverness, 28th October) of the prior treaty executed at Perth, 6th July
1266, between King Alexander III. and Magnus IV. (the son of the
unfortunate Hakon), by which the Kings of Norway ceded for ever the Isle
of Man and all the other islands of the Sudreys, and all the islands in
the west and south of the great Haf, except the isles of Orkney and
Shetland, which were specially reserved to Norway. In consideration of
this the King of Scotland became bound to pay to the King of Norway and
his heirs for ever an annual sum of 100 marks, within St. Magnus’
church, in addition to a payment of 4000 marks to be paid within the
space of four years.

It was about the time of Earl John’s visit to the court of King Hakon,
on the occasion above referred to, that there occurred in Norway one of
the most extraordinary instances of imposture on record. A woman
appeared in Bergen, in 1300, declaring that she was the princess
Margaret, daughter of King Eirik, and heiress to the crown of Scotland,
who was believed by all in Norway and in Britain to have died off the
coast of Orkney some ten years previously. She had come over in a ship
from Lubeck,[59] and her story was that she had been “sold” or betrayed
by her attendant Ingibiorg Erlingsdatter, in the interest of certain
persons who wished her out of the way, and had falsely given her out for
dead. Although her appearance and circumstances were strongly against
the credibility of her story, it seems to have taken a strong hold of
the popular mind, and not a few of the clergy and the higher classes,
possibly influenced by political motives, appear to have given her
countenance. She was a married woman, and was accompanied by her
husband, a German. She is described by Bishop Audfinn as being well up
in years, her hair was greyish, and partially whitened with age, and to
all appearance she was at least twenty years older than the date of King
Eirik’s marriage with Margaret of Scotland, and consequently about seven
years older than King Eirik himself, who was but thirteen when he was
married. “Yet,” says Munch, “though the king’s daughter Margaret had
died in the presence of some of the best men of Norway, though her
corpse had been brought back by the bishop and Herr Thore Hakonson, to
King Eirik, who himself had laid it in the open grave, satisfied himself
of the identity of his daughter’s remains, and placed them in the
Christ’s Kirk by the side of her mother’s;—though this woman, in short,
was a rank impostor, yet she found many among the great men to believe
her story, and not a few of the priests also gave her their countenance
and support. That this German woman, purely of her own accord, should
have attempted to personate the princess Margaret ten years after her
death, and should have ventured to appear publicly in Norway on such an
enterprise, seems hardly credible. It is more likely that she may have
been persuaded to it by some parties perceiving in her a certain
personal resemblance, who schooled her in the story she must tell to
give her personation an air of reality.” King Hakon was away from
Bergen, and no action was taken in regard to her case until he returned
in the early part of the winter of 1301. It was natural that he should
wish personally to see and examine the impostor, and confront her with
the princess’s attendants, especially to hear the testimony of Ingibiorg
Erlingsdatter, before deciding on anything. There is no record of the
trial, but soon after the king’s arrival the “false Margaret” was burnt
at Nordness in Bergen, as an impostor, and her husband was beheaded. As
she was being taken through the Kongsgaard gate to the place of
execution, she is reported to have said—“I remember well when I as a
child was taken through this self-same gate to be carried to Scotland.
There was then in the High Church of the Apostles an Iceland priest,
Haflidi[60] by name, who was the court priest of my father King Eirik;
and when the clergy ceased singing, then Sir Haflidi struck up with the
‘Veni Creator,’ and the hymn was sung out to the end just as I was being
taken on board the ship.” Notwithstanding the manifest nature of the
imposture she was regarded by the multitude as a martyr; a chapel was
erected on the spot where she suffered, and the number of pilgrimages
made to it increased to such an extent that Bishop Audfinn interfered
and forbade them.[61]

Earl John’s successor in the earldom of Orkney and Caithness was his son
Magnus, the fifth of the name, and last of the Angus line. He first
appears on record in 1312 in the treaty between King Robert Bruce and
Hakon Magnusson, concluded at Inverness. In 1320, as Earl of Caithness
and Orkney, he subscribed the famous letter to the Pope, asserting the
independence of Scotland.[62] It seems as if he had been dead in 1321,
for in a document addressed by King Robert Bruce to the “ballivi” of the
King of Norway in Orkney, and dated at Cullen, 4th August 1321, he
complains that Alexander Brun, “the king’s enemy,” convicted of _lese
majestatis_, had been received into Orkney and had been refused to be
given up, though instantly demanded by “our ballivus in Caithness, Henry
St. Clair.” He was certainly dead in 1329, for in that year Katharina,
as his widow, executes two charters in her own name as Countess of
Orkney and Caithness, by which she purchases from the Lord High Steward
(Drottset), Herr Erling Vidkunnson, certain lands in Rögnvaldsey,
including the Pentland Skerries.[63] In one of these documents she
speaks of Earl John as he from whom her husband had inherited his
possessions which he left to her, thus corroborating the statement of
the Diploma that Magnus was the son of John.[64]


           VI. THE EARLDOM IN THE STRATHERNE LINE—1321-1379.


The Diploma states that the earldom now passed by lineal succession to
Malise, Earl of Stratherne, Magnus V. having left no male issue. In 1331
Malise, Earl of Stratherne, possessed lands in Caithness,[65] doubtless
in right of his wife, probably a daughter of Magnus V. Malise fell in
the battle of Halidon Hill in 1333, and was succeeded by his son, also
named Malise, who became heir to the three earldoms of Stratherne,
Caithness, and Orkney.

Malise (the younger) styles himself Earl of Stratherne, Caithness, and
Orkney, in a document dated at Inverness in 1334,[66] in which he grants
his daughter Isabella in marriage to William, Earl of Ross, granting her
also the earldom of Caithness failing heirs male of himself and his wife
Marjory.[67]

William, Earl of Ross, succeeded his father Hugh, who fell at Halidon
Hill in 1333, but it is stated that he was not confirmed in the earldom
for three years, on account of his absence in Norway.[68]

It seems that Earl Malise must have passed over to Norway about the same
period, in all probability to obtain formal investiture of the earldom
of Orkney from the Norwegian King Magnus, and William, Earl of Ross, may
have accompanied his father-in-law. There is no record of Malise’s
movements, but we learn incidentally that he had betaken himself to his
northern possessions,[69] when he lost the earldom of Stratherne, which
was declared forfeited by King Edward and given to John de Warrenne,
Earl of Surrey. It is stated that Malise, apparently seeking to preserve
the earldom in a branch of his own family, gave one of his daughters in
marriage to John de Warrenne, and that King David then declared the
earldom forfeited,[70] and bestowed it on his nephew, Maurice de
Moravia,[71] son of Sir John de Moravia of Abercairny, who had married
Malise’s sister Mary.[72]

Malise appears to have made an effort to recover the earldom of
Stratherne in 1334. In that year King Edward, by a letter dated 2d
March, directed Henry de Beaumont, Earl of Boghan, not to allow any
process to be made before him respecting the earldom of Stratherne
forfeited for treason by Earl Malise. He also wrote a letter of the same
date to Edward Balliol, stating that he has heard that Malise, Earl of
Stratherne, claims the county of Stratherne, which he had granted to
John de Warrenne, Earl of Surrey, and requesting Balliol to act with
deliberation.[73]

The Diploma states that Malise was first married to Johanna, daughter of
Sir John Menteith, and that by her he had a daughter Matilda, married to
Wayland de Ard. But there is a record of a confirmation by Robert I.
(1306-1329) of a grant of the lands of Carcathie (Cortachy) in
Forfarshire, and half of Urkwell in the earldom of Stratherne, by
Malise, Earl of Stratherne, to his wife Johanna, daughter of the late
John de Monteith.[74] As Malise the younger only became Earl of
Stratherne on the death of his father in 1333, if the confirmation be
correctly ascribed to Robert I., this must refer to the Malise who was
earl previous to 1333, and who had a daughter Matilda contracted to
Robert de Thony in 1293, “being not yet in her 20th year.”[75]

The Diploma further states that Malise (the younger) was married the
second time to a daughter of Hugh, Earl of Ross, consequently a sister
of William, Earl of Ross, who married Malise’s daughter Isabella. From
the deed of 1334 we learn that Malise’s wife’s name was Marjory. In a
deed of 1350 we find William, Earl of Ross, styling his sister Marjory
Countess of Caithness and Orkney,[76] and with her consent appointing
his brother Hugh his heir in the event of his own death without male
issue. From this it would appear that Malise was then dead. He must have
been dead before 1353, when his son-in-law, Erngils Suneson, obtained
the title of Earl of Orkney from the King of Norway. He is mentioned as
dead in 1357 and 1358,[77] and the Earl of Ross is then said to have
entered to his lands in Caithness, doubtless in right of his wife
Isabella, and in terms of that deed of 1334 previously noticed.[78]

While Malise was in Norway and Sweden two of his daughters had been
married to Swedish noblemen—one to Arngils[79] or Erngisl, son of Sune
Jonsson, and another to Guttorm Sperra.[80] On the death of Malise, or
shortly thereafter, Erngisl Suneson claimed his wife’s share of the
earldom. In the year 1353 we find him executing a deed on the 10th April
as plain Erngisl Suneson, and on the 6th May thereafter his signature
appears to a document drawn up at Vagahuus concerning the queen’s dowry,
occupying the foremost place among the nobles of Norway, and with the
title of Earl of Orkney.[81] Although the Diploma states that he held
only his wife’s share of the earldom, it is plain from this document
that he must have received the title of Earl of the Orkneys from the
King of Norway. He soon became involved with the Swedish party in favour
of King Eirik of Pomern, and in 1357 King Magnus sequestrated his
estates in Norway, and declared his title forfeited. His right to the
earldom would have lapsed with the death of his wife, who died childless
before 1360.[82] Nevertheless he continued to style himself Earl of
Orkney during his lifetime.[83] He died in 1392.

On the sequestration of Erngisl’s rights by the king, a certain Duncan
Anderson, who appears to have been a Scotchman, and probably agent for
Alexander de Ard, the son of Matilda, called the eldest daughter of
Malise, issued a manifesto, notifying to the inhabitants of Orkney that
he has the true and legitimate heir of Earl Malise, the former Earl of
Orkney, under his guardianship; that this heir has now the full and
undeniable right to the earldom; and that, as he has heard that the King
of Norway has recently sequestrated the revenues of the earldom, he
warns the inhabitants not to allow these revenues to be taken furth of
the land till the true heir be presented to them, which will be ere very
long, if the Lord will. The inhabitants, who seem to have been somewhat
disquieted by the missive, sent a representation on the subject to the
court of Norway. It would seem that a representation must have been made
by the court of Norway to the Scottish King regarding the troubling of
the islands by the claimants or their friends in Scotland, for an edict
was issued by King David from Scone, in 1367, forbidding any of his
subjects, of whatever rank or condition, to pass into Orkney, or
frequent its harbours, on any other errand than that of lawful commerce.

In 1375, King Hakon of Norway granted the earldom of Orkney for a single
year till next St. John’s Day to Alexander de Ard,[84] naming him,
however, in the document not as Earl but simply as Governor and
Commissioner for the King, and declaring, in the document addressed to
the Islanders, that this grant is given provisionally until the said
Alexander shall establish his claim to the earldom. He seems not to have
been regarded with much favour by the king, for this grant was not
renewed, and in 1379 Henry St. Clair and Malise Sparre preferred their
claims to the earldom.

Alexander de Ard had succeeded to the earldom of Caithness by the law
and custom of Scotland, in right of his mother as heir to Earl Malise.
In 1375 he resigned the castle of Brathwell (Brawl), and all the lands
in Caithness or any other part of Scotland which he inherited in right
of his mother, Matilda de Stratherne, to King Robert II., who bestowed
them on his own son, David Stewart.

Earl David Stewart appears in 1377-78 as Earl Palatine of Stratherne and
Caithness. King Robert III. gave the earldom of Caithness to his
brother, Walter Stewart, of Brechin, who held it till about 1424. He
then resigned it to his son Alan, who was slain at Inverlochy in 1431.
The earldom reverted to his father, who in 1437 was forfeited for his
share in the murder of King James I. The earldom remained in possession
of the crown till 1452, when it was granted by King James II. to Sir
George Crichtoun, Admiral of Scotland. On his death in 1455 King James
granted the earldom of Caithness to William St. Clair, then Earl of
Orkney, in whose line it has continued till the present day.


          VII. THE EARLDOM IN THE LINE OF ST. CLAIR—1379-1469.


The genealogical questions connected with the succession of the St.
Clairs of Roslin to the earldom of Orkney are involved in apparently
inextricable confusion.

So early as 1321 we find a Henry St. Clair acting as the “ballivus” of
King Robert Bruce in Caithness,[85] and in 1364 we also find a Thomas
St. Clair installed at Kirkwall as the “ballivus” of the King of Norway,
an Alexander St. Clair, and a Euphemia de Stratherne, styling herself
one of the heirs of the late Malise, Earl of Stratherne.[86]

The Diploma states explicitly that one of the four daughters of Malise,
Earl of Stratherne,[87] by his wife Marjory, daughter of Hugh, Earl of
Ross, was married to William St. Clair. This must be William St. Clair,
son of the Sir William St. Clair who fell with the Douglas in Spain
fighting against the Saracens in 1330.[88] The Diploma goes on to
narrate that Henry St. Clair, the son of William St. Clair and this
daughter of Malise, succeeded to the earldom of Orkney apparently in
right of his mother. We know from the deed of investiture that his
accession to the earldom took place in 1379.

In a charter of 1391 Earl Henry names his mother Isabella St. Clair. It
is usually said that his father, William St. Clair, married Isabella,
daughter of Malise, Earl of Stratherne. But, as we have seen from the
deed of 1334, Isabella was married to William, Earl of Ross, not to
William, Earl of Roslin. Yet it appears from the deed of 1391 that
Henry’s mother’s name was Isabella, and though he does not style her a
daughter of Malise, the terms of the document imply that she was heiress
to lands in Orkney and Shetland. The Diploma only mentions one of the
Earls Malise, and it may be that the Isabella whom William St. Clair
married was the daughter of the elder and sister of the younger Malise
of Stratherne.

If he had married one of the four daughters of the younger Malise it
seems unaccountable why he did not claim his wife’s portion of the
earldom. We find that the representatives of the other sisters were
claimants, and that one of them, Erngisl Suneson, actually received his
wife’s share, and enjoyed the title of Earl of Orkney, while Alexander
de Ard is said to have succeeded to the earldom of Caithness in virtue
of a similar claim, and had his rights to the earldom of Orkney so far
recognised by the King of Norway on the forfeiture of Erngisl Suneson.
The Earl of Ross, as we have seen, also succeeded to the share falling
to his wife Isabella. But no claim seems to have been made for the
Isabella who is said to have been married to William St. Clair. If she
had been a daughter of the younger Malise it can scarcely be doubted
that such a claim would have been made, and if made, established as
readily as that of the other sisters. William St. Clair was alive in
1358, five years after the claim of the sister married to Erngisl
Suneson had been made good, and one year after Erngisl’s title to the
earldom had been declared forfeited.

But a more fatal objection to the statement of the Diploma, that
William’s wife was a daughter of the younger Malise, arises from the
fact that in the attestation by the Lawman and Canons of Orkney in
favour of James of Cragy (1422) it is expressly certified that Henry
Sinclair was himself married to a daughter of the younger Malise, styled
“Elizabeth de Stratherne, daughter of the late reverend and venerable
Malise, Earl of Orkney,” and that by her he had a daughter, Margaret,
who was married to James of Cragy. The Diploma, on the other hand,
states that Henry was married to Janet Haliburton, daughter of Walter
Haliburton of Dirleton, and by her had a son Henry, who succeeded him.
It is quite possible, however, that both these statements might be true,
the attestation in favour of James of Cragy having no reason to mention
the second wife, and the Diploma having no special reason to mention the
first wife in connection with the succession which it derives through
the mother, making her, moreover, such a remarkable instance of
longevity that she survived her husband, her son, and all her younger
sisters, and all their sons and daughters, and became sole heiress to
the earldom after Earl Henry’s death, although he left a son who ought
to have succeeded him, but who, according to the Diploma, succeeded to
her, his grandmother.

In whatever way these apparently contradictory statements are to be
reconciled, the statement of the Diploma that Henry St. Clair was the
first of the line who enjoyed the title of Earl of Orkney is undoubtedly
borne out by the records. In the summer of 1379 he passed over to Norway
and received formal investiture from King Hakon of the earldom of Orkney
and also of the lordship of Shetland,[89] which, since the time of its
forfeiture to King Sverrir by Earl Harald Maddadson, had been in the
possession of the crown of Norway. The conditions on which he accepted
the earldom are set forth at length in the deed of investiture, and
contrasting them with the semi-independence of the ancient earls a
recent writer has remarked that they left him little more than the lands
of his fathers.[90] Although the Earls of Orkney had precedence of all
the titled nobility of Norway, and their signatures to the national
documents stand always after the Archbishops, and before the Bishops and
nobles, though the title was the only hereditary one permitted in Norway
to a subject not of the blood royal, yet it was now declared to be
subject to the royal option of investiture. The earl was to govern the
Islands and enjoy their revenues during the king’s pleasure, but he was
taken bound to serve the king beyond the bounds of the earldom, with a
hundred men fully equipped, when called on by the king’s message; he was
to build no castle or place of strength in the Islands, make no war,
enter into no agreement with the bishop, nor sell or impignorate any of
his rights, without the king’s express consent; and moreover he was to
be answerable for his whole administration to the king’s court at
Bergen. At his death the earldom and all the Islands were to revert to
the King of Norway or his heirs, and if the earl left sons they could
not succeed to their father’s dignity and possessions without the royal
investiture. At the following Martinmas he was taken bound to pay to the
king 1000 English nobles.[91] It was part of the compact also that
Malise Sperra, son of Guthorm Sperra, should depart from all his claims
to the earldom in right of his mother;[92] and he left with King Hakon,
as hostages for the due fulfilment of his share of the contract, the
following from among his friends and followers:— William Daniel, knight,
Malise Sperra, and David Crichton.

But King Hakon died in the year after Earl Henry’s investiture, and the
events that took place in the Orkneys during the reign of King Olaf, his
successor, are entirely unknown to the Norwegian chroniclers. Earl Henry
seems neither to have courted the favour of his suzerain nor to have
stood in awe of his interference. He built the castle of Kirkwall in
defiance of the prohibition contained in the deed of his investiture,
and seems to have felt himself sufficiently independent to rule his
sea-girt earldom according to his own will and pleasure.

The fact that King Hakon’s investiture of Earl Henry took him bound not
to enter into any league with the bishop nor to establish any friendship
with him without the king’s express consent, shows us that the bishop
was then acting in opposition to the king and the representatives of the
civil power. The likelihood is that Earl Henry found this opposition of
the bishop favourable to his own design of making himself practically
independent, and represented it as the excuse for the erection of the
castle of Kirkwall, contrary to the terms of his agreement with the
crown. Munch attributes the discord to the growing dislike of the
Norwegian inhabitants of the Islands to Scotsmen, whose numbers had been
long increasing through the influence of the Scottish family connections
of the later earls. Whatever may have been its origin, the end of it was
that in some popular commotion, of which we have no authentic account,
the bishop was slain in the year 1382.[93]

Malise Sperra appears to have endeavoured to establish himself in
Shetland[94] in opposition to Earl Henry. He had seized, it is not
stated upon what grounds, the possessions in Shetland which had belonged
to Herdis Thorvaldsdatter, and of which Jón Hafthorson and Sigurd
Hafthorson were the lawful heirs. It seems as if a court had been about
to be held by the earl to settle the legal rights of the parties
concerned. The court would be held at the old Thingstead, near
Scalloway, but a conflict took place, the dispute was terminated by the
strong hand, and Malise Sperra was slain.[95] As a number of his men
were slain with him, it seems probable that he had been the aggressor.
As both he and the earl are among those who were present at the assembly
of nobles at Helsingborg, on the accession of King Eirik of Pomern in
September 1389, and the Iceland Annals place the death of Malise Sperra
in this same year, it is probable that the earl landed in Shetland on
his way home from Norway for the express purpose of seeing justice done
in the cause of the heirs of Thordis. In 1391, by a deed executed at
Kirkwall (and subsequently confirmed by King Robert III.), he dispones
the lands of Newburgh and Auchdale in Aberdeenshire,[96] to his brother
David for his services rendered, and in exchange for any rights he may
have to lands in Orkney and Shetland, derived from his mother Isabella
St. Clair. In 1396 a deed was executed at Roslin by John de Drummond of
Cargyll, and Elizabeth, his wife, in favour of Henry, Earl of Orkney,
Lord Roslyn, “patri nostro,” by which they renounce in favour of the
earl’s male issue, and for them and their heirs, all claims to the
earl’s lands “infra regnum Norvagie.”[97]

The Diploma states that after the death of the first Henry St. Clair,
his mother, the daughter of Malise,[98] came to Orkney, and, outliving
all her sisters and all their sons and daughters, became the only
heiress of the earldom. It is added that of this thing there were
faithful witnesses still living who had seen and spoken with the mother
of Henry the first.

Her grandson Henry, son of the first Henry, succeeded to the earldom,
but there seems to be no record of his investiture by the Norwegian
king. In 1404 he was entrusted with the guardianship of James I., and on
his way to France with the young prince, for whose safety it was judged
necessary that he should be removed from Scotland, he was captured by
the English off Flamborough Head, and retained some time in
captivity.[99] In 1412 he went to France with Archibald Douglas to
assist the French against the English.[100] In 1418 John St. Clair, his
brother, swears fealty to King Eirik at Helsingborg for the king’s land
of Hjaltland, and becomes bound to administer the Norse laws according
to the ancient usage, and it is stipulated that at his death Shetland
should again revert to the crown of Norway.[101] It seems from this that
Earl Henry must have been dead in 1418, though Bower in his continuation
of Fordun says that he died in 1420.[102] A dispensation was granted for
his widow’s marriage in 1418.[103]

Henry was succeeded by his son William, the last of the Orkney earls
under Norwegian rule. But the investiture of the new earl did not take
place till 1434, and for a period of fourteen years the administration
of the Islands was carried on by commissioners appointed by King Eirik.

On the death of Earl Henry, Bishop Thomas Tulloch was appointed
commissioner in 1420. He swore fealty to King Eirik in the church of
Vestenskov in Laland, undertaking the administration of the Islands
according to the Norsk law-book and the ancient usages.[104] On 10th
July 1422 he received as a fief from the king “the palace of Kirkwall
and pertinents, lying in Orkney, in Norway, together with the lands of
Orkney and the government thereof.”[105]

In 1423 the administration of the Orkneys and Shetland was committed to
David Menzies of Wemyss by King Eirik. In 1426 a complaint was sent to
the king by the inhabitants, setting forth that they had been subjected
to oppression and wholesale spoliation during the period of his
administration.[106] Among the accusations preferred against him it was
asserted that he diminished the value of the money by one-half, that he
threw the Lawman of the Islands into prison unjustly, and illegally
possessed himself of the public seal and the law-book of the Islands,
which the Lawman’s wife had deposited on the altar of the Church of St.
Magnus for their security; that he exacted fines and services illegally
and with personal violence, and was guilty of many other illegal acts of
tyrannical oppression.

The government of the Islands seems to have been again entrusted to
Bishop Tulloch[107] until 1434, when the young earl received his formal
investiture.[108]

William, the last of the Orkney earls under Norwegian rule, succeeded to
his father Henry, and received investiture on terms nearly similar to
those imposed upon his grandfather. Moreover, he was to hold for the
king and his successors the castle of Kirkwall, which his grandfather
had built without the king’s consent. He had taken the title before he
received investiture from King Eirik, for in 1426 he appears as Earl of
Orkney on the assize at Stirling, for the trial of Murdoch, Duke of
Albany.[109] In 1435, as Lord High Admiral of Scotland, he had command
of the fleet that conveyed the Princess Margaret to France. In 1446 he
was summoned by the Norwegian Rigsraad to appear at Bergen on next St.
John’s Day,[110] to take the oath of allegiance to King Christopher, the
successor of Eirik of Pomern. In 1460 the king’s commissioners in
Kirkwall certify to King Christian I. that John of Ross, Lord of the
Isles, has for a long time most cruelly endeavoured to depopulate the
Islands of Orkney and Shetland by burning the dwellings and slaying the
inhabitants, and that in these circumstances Lord William St. Clair, the
Earl of Orkney and Caithness,[111] had been prevented from coming to the
king.[112] On 28th June 1461 Bishop William of Orkney writes to the king
from Kirkwall excusing the earl for not having come to take the oath of
allegiance, because in the month of June of that year he had been
appointed one of the regents of the Kingdom of Scotland on account of
the tender years of the prince (King James III.), and therefore was
personally resident in Scotland. The bishop also repeats the complaint
against John of Ross, Lord of the Isles, and the bands of his Islesmen,
Irish, and Scots from the woods, “who came in great multitudes in the
month of June, with their ships and fleets in battle array, wasting the
lands, plundering the farms, destroying habitations, and putting the
inhabitants to the sword, without regard to age or sex.”[113] Tradition
still points in several parts of the Islands to “the Lewismen’s graves,”
probably those of the invaders who were killed in their plundering
expeditions through the Islands.

On the 8th September 1468 a contract of marriage was signed between
James III. of Scotland and Margaret, daughter of King Christian I. of
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, by which, after discharging the arrears of
the tribute due by Scotland for Man and the Hebrides,[114] King
Christian engaged to pay a dowry of 60,000 florins with his daughter,
stipulating for certain jointure lands (including the palace of
Linlithgow and the castle of Doune), and her terce of the royal
possessions in Scotland if left a widow. Of the dowry 10,000 florins
were to be paid before the princess’s departure, and the Islands of
Orkney were pledged for the balance of 50,000 florins. Only 2000 florins
of the 10,000 promised were paid, and the Islands of Shetland were
pledged for the remainder. The amount for which the whole of the Islands
of Orkney and Shetland were thus impignorated was 58,000 florins of 100
pence each, or about £24,000.

In 1471 King James III. gave William, Earl of Orkney, the castle and
lands of Ravenscraig in Fife in exchange for all his rights to the
earldom of Orkney, and an Act of Parliament was passed on the 20th of
February of the same year annexing to the Scottish Crown “the Erledome
of Orkney and Lordship of Schetland, nocht to be gevin away in time to
cum to na persain or persainis, excep alenarily to ane of the king’s
sonnis of lauchful bed.”


                VIII. THE BISHOPRIC OF ORKNEY—1060-1469.


The origin of the bishopric of Orkney is involved in obscurity. Its
early history is complicated by the fact that there were two if not
three distinct successions of bishops, only one of which is recognised
by the Norse writers.

The Saga statement regarding the origin of the bishopric unfortunately
is lacking in precision. It is stated that Earl Thorfinn built Christ’s
Kirk in Birsay, apparently after his return from his pilgrimage to Rome,
and that the first bishop’s see in the Orkneys was established there.
Taking this in connection with the statement that William the Old, who
was bishop in 1115, when St. Magnus was murdered, was the first bishop,
the inference would be that the bishopric was erected in his time. The
statement regarding his tenure of office for sixty-six years is scarcely
credible; but supposing it to be the fact, as he died in 1167, we obtain
1102 as the date of the erection of the bishopric.

On the other hand, Adam of Bremen states[115] that Thorolf was the first
Bishop of Orkney, and that he was consecrated by Adalbert, Archbishop of
Hamburg, in the middle of the 11th century,[116] and that another bishop
named Adalbert succeeded him. Now, as William the Old was not
consecrated before 1102, if there was a bishop in Earl Thorfinn’s time
(the date of his death being 1064), it must have been this Thorolf. If
Thorolf was consecrated in the middle of the 11th century, it was
probably before Earl Thorfinn’s death in 1064. But it seems that the see
was vacant or unoccupied before 1093.

It appears from a letter of Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury
(1070-1089), that Earl Paul of Orkney had sent to him a cleric whom he
wished to be consecrated a bishop, and Lanfranc orders Wulstan, Bishop
of Worcester, and Peter, Bishop of Chester, to go to York and assist the
archbishop there at the consecration. This must refer to the Earl Paul,
son of Thorfinn, who with his brother Erlend was carried to Norway by
King Magnus on his second expedition to the west in 1098, and neither of
them ever returned. The name of this bishop is not given in Lanfranc’s
letter. But the English writers[117] mention that in the end of the 11th
century a cleric named Ralph was consecrated Bishop of Orkney by Thomas,
Archbishop of York. Thomas was archbishop from A.D. 1070 to 1100. It is
mentioned that when the right of the Archbishop of York to consecrate
Turgot Bishop of St. Andrews was asserted in 1109, it was proposed that
he should do it by the assistance of the (English) Bishops of Scotland
and of Orkney. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury (1092-1107), wrote[118]
to Earl Hakon Palson, exhorting him and his people to obey the bishop
“whom now by the grace of God they had.”

A second bishop, named Roger, was consecrated by Gerard, who was
Archbishop of York in the beginning of the 12th century, from 1100 to
1108.

A third bishop, named Ralph, previously a presbyter of York, said to
have been elected by the people of Orkney, was consecrated by Archbishop
Thomas, the successor of Gerard. It is this Ralph who figures in the
accounts of the battle of Northallerton, 1138. Pope Calixtus II. and
Pope Honorius II. addressed letters to the Norwegian Kings, Sigurd and
Eystein, in favour of Ralph.[119] In the letter of Pope Honorius it is
expressly stated that another bishop had been intruded in the place of
Ralph. This must refer to William the Old, whom the Sagas make bishop
from the year 1102.

The explanation of all this seems to be that the Archbishops of Hamburg
and York both tried in vain to secure the right of consecrating the
Bishops of Orkney; the former on the ground that as the successors of
St. Anschar they were primates of the Scandinavian churches, and the
latter on the same ground on which they claimed the right to consecrate
the Bishop of St. Andrews—viz. that their jurisdiction extended to the
whole of Scotland and the Isles. In the appendix to Florence of
Worcester’s Chronicle,[120] written in the beginning of the 12th
century, it is said that “the Archbishop of York had jurisdiction over
all the bishops north of the Humber, and all the bishops of Scotland and
the Orkneys, as the Archbishop of Canterbury had over those of Ireland
and Wales.” Meantime, however, the Norwegians made their own bishops,
and these, having obtained possession of the see, were the real bishops
of Orkney, though the others might enjoy the empty title.

Thus WILLIAM THE OLD was the first of the actual bishops of Orkney of
whom we have distinct record. As the Saga and the Saga of St. Magnus
both state explicitly that he held the bishopric for sixty-six years,
and the Annals place his death in 1168, he must have been consecrated in
1102. The see, which was first at Birsay, where Earl Thorfinn erected
the Christ’s Kirk,[121] was removed to Kirkwall on the erection of the
Cathedral, 1137-52. He went with Earl Rögnvald to the Holy Land in 1152.
When Pope Anastasius erected the metropolitan see of Trondheim in 1154
he declared the Bishop of Orkney one of its suffragans, and Bishop
William’s canonical rights were thus implicitly recognised. He died in
1168; and in 1848, when certain repairs were being executed on the
cathedral, his bones were found enclosed in a stone cist thirty inches
long and fifteen inches wide, along with a bone object like the handle
of a staff, and a leaden plate, inscribed in characters apparently of
the 13th century:—

            HIC REQUIESCIT WILLIALMUS SENEX, FELICIS MEMORIÆ,
            PRIMUS EPISCOPUS.

The position in which the bones were found in the choir seems to
indicate that they must have been moved from their previous
resting-place. Bishop William’s bones, and the cist which contained
them, were carted away with the rubbish when the church was re-seated in
1856.[122] The leaden plate and bone object which were found in the cist
are preserved in the Museum of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland.

WILLIAM II., the second bishop, is only known from the entry of his name
in the list of bishops[123] (1325), and the entry of his death under the
year 1188 in the Icelandic Annals.

BJARNI, son of Kolbein Hruga (who built the castle on the island of
Weir), was the third bishop. His mother, Herborg, was a
great-granddaughter of Earl Paul.[124] Bjarni himself was a famous poet,
and to him is ascribed the _Jomsvikinga-drapa_—the Lay of the Jomsburg
Vikings.[125] A bull of Pope Innocent III., dated at the Vatican, 27th
May 1198,[126] is addressed to him in connection with the refusal of
Bishop John of Caithness to collect an annual tribute in his diocese, as
noticed hereafter.[127] It appears from a deed of his in the Chartulary
of the monastery of Munkalif at Bergen that he possessed lands in
Norway, as well as his patrimonial lands in Orkney and castle in the
island of Weir. By that deed he gives to the monastery, “for the souls
of his father (Kolbein Hruga), his mother, his brother, his relations
and friends,” the lands called _Holand_, near the Dalsfiord, north of
Bergen. It is curious thus to find in authentic records a mortification
of lands to a church in Norway to provide masses for the soul of a man
who is now known in his own former home in Orkney only as _Cobbie Row_,
“the giant,” or “goblin” of the castle, which he built and inhabited.
Bishop Bjarni was present with John, Earl of Orkney, at the great
assembly of nobles at Bergen,[128] in 1223, and died shortly thereafter.

JOFREYR, the fourth bishop, was consecrated in 1223, according to the
Annals. There was a Jofreyr, Dean of Tunsberg, present at the same
assembly in Bergen above referred to, and as the name is a very uncommon
one, it is probable that he is the same who was made Bishop of the
Orkneys. He seems to have been long an invalid, for, by a bull dated at
Viterbo, 11th May 1237,[129] Pope Gregory IX. enjoins Sigurd, Archbishop
of Nidaros (Drontheim), to move Bishop Jofreyr of Orkney, who had been
paralytic and confined to bed for many years, to resign office, or, if
he was unwilling to resign, to provide him with a wise and prudent
helper. Jofreyr retained the see, however, for ten years after this. The
Annals place his death in 1247.

HENRY (I.) was the fifth bishop. A papal dispensation for the defect of
his birth, by Pope Innocent IV., is dated 9th December 1247.[130] He was
then a canon in the Orkneys. He was with King Hakon’s expedition in
1263, and died in 1269.

PETER, the sixth bishop, was consecrated in 1270. A brief of his,[131]
dated at Tunsberg, 3d September 1278, grants forty days’ indulgence to
those in his diocese who contribute in aid of the restoration of St.
Swithin’s cathedral at Stavanger, which had been destroyed by fire. He
died in 1284.

DOLGFINN, the seventh bishop, was consecrated in 1286. Nothing is known
of him but the name. He died, according to the Annals, in 1309.

WILLIAM (III.) was the eighth bishop. He was consecrated in 1310. At the
Provincial Council held at Bergen, in 1320, there were several
complaints made by the archbishop against William, Bishop of
Orkney.[132] Kormak, an archdeacon of the Sudreys, and Grim Ormson,
prebendary of Nidaros, had been sent by the archbishop on a visitation
of the diocese of Orkney, and had reported that William had squandered
the property of the see, that he had bestowed the offices of the church
on foreigners and apostates, that he had compromised his dignity as a
prelate of the church by participation in the boisterous pastime of
hunting and other unseemly diversions, that he had been careless and
lukewarm in the exercise of his spiritual office, and had not sought out
those who practised idolatry and witchcraft, or who were heretics or
followed ungodly ways. Moreover, he had imprisoned Ingilbert Lyning, a
canon of Orkney, whom the archbishop had sent to make inquiry into the
collection of the Peter’s pence, and had deprived him of his prebendary
and all his property. He had also clandestinely appropriated to himself
during fifteen years a portion of the church dues, amounting to the
value of 53 marks sterling, and he had refused to permit the removal of
the corpse of a woman from Orkney, although her will had been that she
should be interred in the cathedral of Trondheim. He was suspended in
the following year (1321) by the archbishop, but in 1324 we find him
assisting at the consecration of Laurentius, Bishop of Hole.[133] By a
deed,[134] dated at Bergen, 9th September 1327, he mortgages his dues of
Shetland to his metropolitan, Eilif, Archbishop of Nidaros, for the
payment of 186 marks sterling, which he should have paid the archbishop
for six years’ teinds. By another document of the same year,[135] Bishop
Audfinn of Bergen requests Bishop William of Orkney to assist his priest
Ivar in the collection of the _Sunnive-miel_—a contribution which the
inhabitants of Shetland had paid from old time to the shrine of St.
Sunniva at Bergen. The date of this bishop’s death has not been
ascertained.

WILLIAM (IV.), ninth bishop, succeeded him, sometime after the year
1328. There is extant an agreement between him and Hakon Jonsson, dated
at Kirkwall, 25th May 1369.[136] The next mention we have of him is the
entry in the Annals, under the date 1382—“Then was heard the mournful
tidings that Bishop William was slain in the Orkneys.”

WILLIAM (V.), tenth bishop, appears only in a record of the time of King
Robert III. of Scotland. Munch supposes that he may have been the
William Johnson who appears as Archdeacon of Zetland, in a Norse deed
dated at Sandwick in Shetland, March 4, 1360.

HENRY (II.), eleventh bishop, according to Torfæus, appears in a record
of 1394.

JOHN, twelfth bishop, appears in the Union Treaty of Calmar in 1397.

PATRICK, thirteenth bishop, appears in an Attestation by the Lawman of
Orkney, two canons of the church of St. Magnus, and four burgesses of
Kirkwall, of the descent and good name of James of Cragy, laird of
Hupe.[137] He is otherwise unnoticed, but as he is there referred to by
his canonical title, and the many losses, injuries, and disquietudes
which he endured at the hands of his adversaries, are specially alluded
to, there seems to be no doubt that he held the bishopric between the
death of John and the incumbency of Thomas de Tulloch.

THOMAS de Tulloch, fourteenth bishop, first appears in existing records
in 1418. He seems to have been previously Bishop of Ross.[138] On 17th
June 1420, at the church of Vestenskov in Laland, he gives his pledge to
King Eirik and his successors, and undertakes that he will hold the
crown lands of Orkney committed to him, for the Kings of Norway,
promising at the same time to give law and justice to the people of
Orkney according to the Norsk law-book and the ancient usages.[139] In
1422 he receives the palace and pertinents of Kirkwall—“thet slot oc
faeste Kirkqwaw liggende j Orknoy j Norghe meth landet Orknoy,” etc.—as
a fief from King Eirik. A record of the set of the threepenny lands of
Stanbuster, in the parish of St. Andrews, executed by him on 12th July
1455, and confirmed by his successor in 1465, is preserved at Kirkwall.
His death took place before 28th June 1461, when we find his successor
in office.[140]

WILLIAM (VI.) de Tulloch, the last bishop during the dominion of Norway
in the Orkneys, was bishop in June 1461, and tendered his oath of
allegiance in 1462.

A bull of Pope Sixtus IV., dated at the Vatican, 17th August 1472,
placed the see of the Orkneys under the metropolitan Bishop of St.
Andrews.


               IX. THE BISHOPRIC OF CAITHNESS—1150-1469.


The Bishopric of Caithness appears to have been co-extensive with the
older earldom, comprehending Caithness and Sutherland as far south as
Ekkialsbakki or the Kyle of Sutherland. In later times the cathedral
church was at Dornoch.[141] But it would seem as if the episcopal see
had at one time been at Halkirk (called in the Saga _Há Kirkia_, or the
High Kirk), near Thurso, where we find the bishops frequently residing.
The date of the erection of the bishopric is unknown.

ANDREW is the first bishop who appears in authentic records. About the
year 1153 King David granted to him the lands of Hoctor Comon,[142] and
about the same time he himself gave a grant of the Church of the Holy
Trinity of Dunkeld to the monks of Dunfermline.[143] About the year 1165
he and Murethac, his clerk, are witnesses to a charter of Gregory,
Bishop of Dunkeld, confirming the said gift. About the year 1181 he is a
witness to the grant by Earl Harald Maddadson to the see of Rome of a
penny annually from every inhabited house in Caithness, which brought
his successor, Bishop John, into such trouble.[144] He is also a witness
to the remarkable document engrossed in the Book of Deer, by which King
David I. declares the clerics of Deer to be free from all lay
interference and undue exaction, “as it is written in their book, and as
they pleaded at Banff and swore at Aberdeen.”[145] The Chronicle of
Mailros records his death at Dunfermline on 30th December 1185. He seems
to have been a learned man, and was much about the court of David I. He
is said to have been the author of part of the curious treatise “De Situ
Albaniæ,” attributed to Giraldus Cambrensis.

JOHN, second bishop, succeeded him. He seems to have refused to exact
from the inhabitants the papal contribution of one penny annually from
each inhabited house in Caithness granted by Earl Harald, for in a
bull[146] dated at the Vatican, 27th May 1198, Pope Innocent III.
enjoins Bishop Bjarni of Orkney and Bishop Reginald of Ross to compel
Bishop John to give up his opposition to its collection on pain of the
censure of the Church. About this time also Caithness had been taken
from Harald by King William the Lion, with whom he was involved in
hostilities, and given over to Reginald Gudrodson, the petty king of the
Hebrides. Hence, on Harald’s recovery of his possessions in 1202, he was
so exasperated that he took vengeance on the bishop[147] by blinding him
and cutting out his tongue, and inflicted severe punishments on the
people, whom he held to have been guilty of rebellion. Bishop John
appears to have survived his mutilation till 1213.

ADAM, third bishop, was consecrated in 1214 by Malvoisin, Bishop of St.
Andrews. He was a foundling exposed at a church door, but he had been
Abbot of Melrose previous to his appointment to the see of Caithness. In
1218 he went with the Bishops of Glasgow and Moray on a pilgrimage to
Rome. He seems to have been of an opposite disposition to that of his
predecessor, who suffered martyrdom in the cause of his people. It was
an old custom in Caithness that the husbandmen paid the bishop a _spann_
of butter for every twenty cows. Bishop Adam exacted the contribution
first for every fifteen, and at length for every ten cows. Exasperated
by these exactions, the people rose in a body and came to him at
Halkirk, where in the tumult a monk of Newbottle named Serlo was killed
and the bishop himself burned in his own kitchen. A letter of Pope
Honorius III., dated in January 1222, and addressed to the Scottish
bishops of the time, is extant in the archives of the Vatican,[148] in
which, after commending King Alexander for his promptitude and zeal in
avenging Bishop Adam’s murder, he goes on to tell that, having learned
from their letters what a horrible crime, what a detestable deed had
been committed, his spirit quailed and his heart trembled and his ears
tingled as he realised the daring atrocity of the deed. “Your letters,”
he says, “have informed us that a dispute having arisen between Adam,
Bishop of Caithness, of adorable memory, on the one part, and his
parishioners on the other, concerning the tithes and other rights of the
Church, and these matters having been submitted to the king himself by
the mediation of certain ecclesiastics, with consent of the bishop, and
the king being absent in England, his parishioners, moved with anger
against him because he upheld the cause of his Church against them, fell
on their pious pastor like ravening wolves, on their father like
degenerate sons, and on their Lord Christ like emissaries of the devil,
stripped him of his clothing, stoned him, mortally wounded him with an
axe, and finally killed and burned him in his own kitchen.” The letter
concludes with an injunction to excommunicate all concerned in the
murder. The bishop’s body was interred in the church at Skinnet, and is
said to have been subsequently removed to Dornoch in 1239.[149] The Saga
states that the fearful vengeance taken by King Alexander II. for the
murder of the bishop was still fresh in memory in the writer’s time; and
we learn from the Annals that “the Scottish king caused the hands and
feet to be hewn from eighty men who had been present at the burning, so
that many of them died.”

GILBERT de Moravia, fourth bishop, had been Archdeacon of Moray previous
to his elevation to the see of Caithness in 1223. He built the cathedral
at Dornoch, and his charter of constitution[150] is still extant in the
record-room at Dunrobin Castle. For many years there had been an
intimate connection between the diocese of Caithness and the abbey of
Scone,[151] and in the constitution of his cathedral Bishop Gilbert
named the Abbot of Scone one of the canons. The fourteen churches
assigned to the prebends were those of Clyne, Dornoch, Creich, Rogart,
Lairg, Farr, Kildonan, and Durness, in Sutherland; and Bower, Watten,
Skinnet, Olrig, Dunnet, and Canisbay, in Caithness. Golspie and Loth,
Reay, Thurso, Wick, and Latheron, were reserved to the bishop.

He seems to have been a man of mark in his time. He built the “Bishop’s
Castle” at Scrabster, and was made keeper of the king’s castles in the
north.[152] He seems also to have been the first discoverer of gold in
Sutherlandshire, for Sir Robert Gordon states that he “found a mine of
gold in Duriness, in the lands belonging to his bishoprick.” He died at
Scrabster in 1245, and was afterwards canonised. His relics were
preserved in the cathedral church at Dornoch, and continued to be held
in reverence down to the middle of the 16th century. In a record of the
year 1545 it is stated that the parties compearing before Earl John of
Sutherland in the chapter-house of the cathedral at Dornoch made oath by
touching the relics of the blessed Saint Gilbert. He is the only bishop
of Caithness, except Bishop Adam, whose death is recorded in the
Icelandic Annals. The entry is under the year 1244:—“Death of Gilibert,
bishop in Scotland.”

WILLIAM, fifth bishop, was his successor. In 1250 he appears among the
other Scottish bishops in a document addressed to Alexander III.
concerning the liberties of the Church. He died in 1261 or 1262.

WALTER de Baltrodin, a canon of Caithness, was chosen as his successor.
Pope Urban IV. in 1263 addressed a letter[153] to the bishops of
Dunkeld, Brechin, and Ross, setting forth that his election had not been
proceeded with according to canonical form, but as it had been
unanimous, and in consideration of the poverty of the Church, and the
expense of making such long journeys to distant places, he enjoins them
to prefer the said Walter to the bishopric if they find that he is not
disqualified by defect of birth or otherwise. He died before 1274. On
his death, Nicolas, Abbot of Scone, was chosen as his successor, but
rejected by the Pope.[154]

ARCHIBALD, Archdeacon of Moray, was chosen on the rejection by the Pope
of Nicolas, Abbot of Scone. The Pope’s letter confirming his election
mentions R., the Dean, Patrick, the treasurer, and Roger de Castello,
canon of Caithness, as the parties by whom he was nominated. In his time
Boyamund de Vitia was commissioned by Pope Gregory X. to collect a
special subsidy in aid of the crusade, and his accounts furnish us with
the names of a number of the churches in the diocese of Caithness and
the amounts contributed.[155]

Bishop Archibald must have been dead before 1279, for in that year the
Pope addressed a letter to the Bishops of St. Andrews and Aberdeen,[156]
setting forth that the see of Caithness being vacant, the chapter had
proceeded to the election of R., the Dean of Caithness, and had
constituted Henry of Nottingan[157] (in Caithness) their procurator to
obtain confirmation of the said election, and that the said Henry, in
the Pope’s presence, had confessed that the said dean had a son thirty
years old or more, and that he was said to have another, although he
(Henry of Nottingan) did not believe it; and, moreover, that he had been
stricken with paralysis, and was old and debilitated. The bishops are
enjoined to use their influence to oblige him to resign.

ALAN de St. Edmund, eighth bishop, was an Englishman, elected by the
influence of Edward I. of England. In 1290 he signs the letter addressed
to that king, proposing a marriage between the Maid of Norway and the
young Prince Edward. Alan was a favourite with King Edward, and was made
Chancellor of Scotland in 1291. In that year a writ[158] was addressed
by the king to Alexander Comyn, keeper of the royal forest of Ternway,
in Moray, ordering him to give Bishop Alan 40 oaks suitable for material
for the fabric of the cathedral church of Caithness, which the king had
granted for the souls of Alexander, King of Scotland, and Margaret, his
queen, the sister of King Edward. Bishop Alan died in 1291, and on his
death King Edward ordered the Bishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow to
commit the vacant cure to some cleric in the king’s allegiance.[159] The
fulfilment of this mandate is not on record, but we learn from the
letter of Pope Boniface VIII.[160] addressed to Bishop Adam in 1296,
that on the death of Alan the chapter of Caithness had chosen the
Archdeacon of Caithness, whose name is given as I(oannes?) to be his
successor, but because the election had not been in canonical form it
was not confirmed by the Pope, who preferred to the vacant diocese Adam,
then precentor of the church of Ross.

ADAM, ninth bishop, as we learn from the Pope’s letter above mentioned,
was not elected in the usual way, but preferred by the Pope and
consecrated by the Bishop of Ostia. The letter addressed by the
Pope[161] “to the chapter of Caithness, to the people of the district
and diocese of Caithness, and to our dearest son in Christ the King of
Scots,” in 1296, announces his preferment, and the reasons that led to
it. He died at Sienna very shortly after the date of this letter.[162]

ANDREW, abbot of the Cistercian monastery of Cupar,[163] was now
preferred to the see of Caithness; and because, “on account of the wars
that are imminent in those parts, and the dangers of the way, which is
long and perilous, it is impossible for him to approach the apostolic
seat for consecration,” a mandate was addressed to the Bishops of
Aberdeen, Glasgow, and Ross, to give him consecration.

FERQUHARD, Bishop of Caithness, appears in 1310, among the other bishops
of Scotland, acknowledging Robert Bruce as King of Scotland. In 1312,
along with Magnus, Earl of Caithness and Orkney, he attests the payment
of 100 marks sterling (the annual tribute payable for the Hebrides) by
King Robert Bruce to the King of Norway, in St. Magnus’ Cathedral,
Kirkwall. He was dead and the see vacant in 1328.[164]

NICOLAS, a deacon, was bishop-elect in 1332.[165]

DAVID was the next bishop, but of him we have no record except that he
was dead before 1340.[166]

ALAN, Archdeacon of Aberdeen, was confirmed as Bishop of Caithness in
1341 by Pope Benedict XII.[167] He died in 1342.

THOMAS de Fingask was elected on the death of Alan, and his confirmation
by Pope Clement VI. is dated in November 1342.[168] He is witness to a
writ by William, Earl of Ross, in 1355, declaring the abbey of Ferne
exempt from all the king’s taxes.[169] He appears as witness to a deed
with Ingelram of Caithness, Archdeacon of Dunkeld, in 1359.[170] He died
at Elgin in 1360, and was buried in our Lady’s aisle of the chanonry
church of Elgin, under the bishop’s seat.

MALCOLM is the next bishop of whom we have any authentic account.[171]
His confirmation by Pope Urban V. is dated Feb. 21, 1369.[172] A bull of
Pope Gregory XI., dated at Avignon in March 1376, confirms to Dr.
William of Spynie the chanonry and prebendary of the church of Orkney,
which had become vacant by the preferment of Malcolm to be Bishop of
Caithness.[173]

ALEXANDER appears as Bishop of Caithness in 1389, when, along with
Alexander, Bishop of Ross, and Adam, Abbot of Kinloss, he takes part in
the settlement of a dispute between the Earl and Bishop of Moray.[174]
He appears by proxy at the provincial synod held at Perth in 1420.[175]

ROBERT was bishop in 1434, and his successor WILLIAM, who appears as
bishop in 1449, was still in office at the period of the transference of
the Orkneys from the Norwegian to Scottish rule, in 1469.


                     X. ANCIENT CHURCHES OF ORKNEY.


“The Cathedral of St. Magnus,” says Worsaae, “is incontestably the most
glorious monument of the time of the Norwegian dominion to be found in
Scotland.” “It is,” says Peterkin, “one of the two cathedral churches in
Scotland remaining entire, and is, therefore, a national monument,
interesting from its antiquity, its beauty, and the rarity of such
relics in this part of the empire.” Nothing conveys to the mind of the
stranger visiting Kirkwall a more vivid impression of the ancient
importance of this quaint little town, which has been the capital of the
Orkneys for at least 800 years, than the grandeur of its cathedral, and
the imposing aspect of the ruins of the palaces of the Bishops and Earls
of Orkney.

The Saga tells how the erection of the cathedral was undertaken by Earl
Rögnvald II. (Kali Kolson), in fulfilment of a vow which he had made to
build and endow a splendid stone minster in Kirkwall in honour of St.
Magnus, his mother’s brother, from whom he derived his right to a share
of the earldom of the Orkneys. He won the earldom in the year 1136, and
the erection of the cathedral was commenced under the superintendence of
his father Kol, in 1137, and carried on until the earl’s means failed.
By agreement with the odallers, a mark for each ploughland in the
islands was contributed for the purpose of carrying on the work, and
this brought in money enough to enable the erection of the church to be
proceeded with.

The cathedral, as it now stands, however, is by no means the work of
Earl Rögnvald’s time, although the portion built by him is still clearly
distinguishable. “The church,” says Sir Henry Dryden,[176] “as designed
and partly built in the time of Kol (father of Earl Rögnvald), was of
the same width as at present, but possibly one bay shorter at the west
end. There can be little doubt that the choir terminated in an apse,
which began about half-way along the great piers in front of the
subsequent altar steps, and extended as far as the line of those steps.
The builders, having laid out the whole church, carried up the choir and
its two aisles and the transepts to the eaves, and built the piers of
the central tower.” The architectural history of the structure, however,
is puzzling. “Though I spent eighteen weeks at the cathedral,” says Sir
Henry in a letter to Mr. Worsaae, “and have thought over the thing many
times, I cannot make out the history of the building to my own
satisfaction. There is no doubt that there is a great deal of copying in
it, _i.e._ of building at one time in the style of another.”[177] The
chief interest of the structure lies in the fact that it was built by a
Norwegian earl, and designed and superintended by the Norwegian Kol, who
had the principal oversight of the whole work. It is significant of
their community of origin that the oldest portions of St. Magnus show
traces of the same peculiarities of style which are found in the nearly
contemporary but somewhat older Norman churches in Normandy, the home of
the Christian descendants of the Vikings who followed Hrólf the
Conqueror, son of Rögnvald, Earl of Moeri.


[Illustration: St. MAGNUS CATHEDRAL, KIRKWALL from the South east]


The cathedral was erected for the express purpose of receiving the
relics of St. Magnus, but we have no record of their transference to the
new church. There is reason to believe that they had been brought to
Kirkwall before the erection of the cathedral was begun, and, though it
is not so stated, it may be inferred that on their removal from Christ’s
Church in Birsay, they were deposited in the church of St. Olaf at
Kirkwall, and remained there for some years until the cathedral was
ready to receive them. It seems probable that it is to the church of St.
Olaf that Kirkwall owes its name of _Kirkiu-vagr_, the Creek of the
Kirk. This name does not occur in the Saga before the time of Earl
Rögnvald Brusison, who is said to have resided there, and it is most
likely that the church of St. Olaf was built by him in memory of his
foster-father, King Olaf the Holy. Earl Rögnvald was in the battle of
Stiklestad (1030) in which the warrior saint of Norway fell, and being
his foster-son he was more likely than any of the subsequent earls to
dedicate a church to his memory. We are told in the Saga[178] that the
relics of St. Magnus were exhumed by Bishop William twenty years after
his death and placed in a shrine at Christ’s Kirk. Shortly thereafter,
says the Saga, St. Magnus appeared in a dream to a man who lived in
Westray, by name Gunni, and ordered him to tell Bishop William that he
(St. Magnus) wished to go out of Birgishérad and east to Kirkwall. Gunni
was afraid to do so lest he should excite the wrath of Earl Paul, whose
father had been the murderer of St. Magnus. The following night St.
Magnus again appeared to him, ordering him to disclose his dream
whatever the consequences might be, and threatening him with punishment
in the life hereafter if he disobeyed. Struck with terror, Gunni went to
the Bishop and told him in the presence of Earl Paul and all the
congregation. Earl Paul, it is said, turned red with anger, but all the
men there united in requesting the bishop to proceed at once to carry
the wishes of St. Magnus into execution. So the bishop went east to
Kirkwall with the relics, accompanied by a great concourse of people,
and “placed them in a shrine upon the altar of the church which then was
there,” and which could have been no other than St. Olaf’s,[179] seeing
that the building of the cathedral was not commenced until after Earl
Paul had been carried off to Athole by Swein Asleifson. The Saga of St.
Magnus adds that there were then few houses in the town, but that after
the relics of St. Magnus had been transferred thither the town rapidly
increased.


[Illustration: EGILSHA S. MAGNUS.]


Earl Rögnvald (II.) himself was buried[180] in the cathedral in 1158. In
the winter of 1263 the remains of King Hakon Hakonson were deposited in
the cathedral previous to their removal to Bergen. Worsaae states that
the remains of the Princess Margaret, the Maid of Norway, were interred
in the cathedral in 1290, and the local tradition is to the same effect,
but there is no authority for the statement. The princess’s remains were
taken back to Norway and buried in the High Church of Bergen by King
Eirik, beside the remains of her mother.[181]

EGILSEY CHURCH, on the little isle of Egilsey, is interesting from the
suggestions of its connection with the earlier Christianity of the
islands previous to the Norse invasion.

The church stands on the highest ground of the island, on the west side,
and is a conspicuous object in the landscape from all sides. It consists
of chancel and nave, but differs from all the existing churches in the
islands in having a round tower rising at the west end of the nave. It
is of small size, the nave being 30 feet long by 15½ feet in breadth
inside, and the chancel 15 feet long by 9½ feet in breadth. The chancel
is vaulted, and the walls are about 3 feet thick. The tower, which seems
to have been built with the nave, is 7 feet diameter inside, and is now
48 feet high, the walls being about 3½ feet thick. It is stated that
about 15 feet were taken off the height to prevent its falling.[182] The
only two windows in the nave that are original are round-headed and 3
feet high, with jambs splaying inwards from 8½ to 33 inches wide, and
having no external chamfer. Two windows in the chancel are exactly
similar but smaller. Over the chancel vault there is a small chamber
lighted by a flat-headed window 18 inches high.

Its original dedication is unknown,[183] and there is nothing to fix the
date of its erection with absolute certainty.


[Illustration: EGILSEY CHURCH, from the South east (from a Photograph)]


“The church of Egilsey,” says Munch, “is shown by its construction to
have been built before the Northmen arrived in Orkney, or, at all
events, to belong to the more ancient Christian Celtic population; both
its exterior and its interior show so many resemblances to the old
churches in Ireland of the 7th and 8th centuries, that we are compelled
to suppose it to have been erected at that time by Irish priests or
_Papas_. As we find no remains of any similar churches on the
islands,[184] we must suppose it to have been the first of the few on
the thinly inhabited isle-group. The island on which it stood might,
therefore, very justly be called ‘Church isle.’ But the Irish word
_Ecclais_ (church), derived from the Latin _Ecclesia_, might easily be
mistaken by our forefathers for Egils, the genitive of the man’s name
Egil.”

If we could unhesitatingly adopt Munch’s view of the origin of the name
Egilsey, it might be safely assumed that this was the church which gave
its name to the island, as no other ecclesiastical site is known within
its bounds. The Norsemen were heathens down to the time of the
Christianising cruise of King Olaf Tryggvason in A.D. 1000, and not very
hearty in their Christianity for a long time after that. The church
could not have been built, therefore, between 872 and the accession of
Earl Thorfinn in 1014. Nor is it likely to have been erected during
Thorfinn’s minority, for he was only five years old when his father fell
fighting under a heathen banner at Clontarf. The Saga tells that
Thorfinn built Christ’s Church in Birsay, and made it the first bishop’s
see in the Orkneys. If he, or any of his successors previous to the
death of St. Magnus, had erected such a notable structure as that of
Egilsey, it would probably have been recorded. There was a church in
Egilsey in 1115 when St. Magnus was murdered, and the only question is
whether it was the present church. Its resemblances to the Irish
churches of the 7th and 8th centuries are not sufficiently definite and
determinative to enable us to assign to it unhesitatingly an Irish
origin; while, on the other hand, the resemblance to the round-towered
churches of Norfolk suggests that it may have been of Scandinavian
origin. But there is nothing in the architecture of the building either
to fix the date of its erection or to determine the questions of Celtic
or Scandinavian origin with any degree of certainty.[185]


[Illustration: ORPHIR.]


The CHURCH OF ORPHIR is one of the few circular churches in Britain,
built in imitation of the church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem. The
crusades were the means of importing this form into the ecclesiastical
architecture of the west. A few of these round churches remain in
Denmark, and, like those of England, they are mostly of the 12th
century.[186]

All that remains of this interesting structure is merely the
semicircular chancel and about 9 feet of the walls of the circular nave
on either side, as shown in the annexed ground-plan. It is described in
the Old Statistical Account as having been a rotundo, 18 feet in
diameter and 20 feet high, two-thirds of which were taken down to build
the present parish church. The curvature of the part of the walls still
remaining would give a diameter of 18 to 19 feet. The semicircular
chancel is 7 feet wide and a little more than 7 feet deep. The walls are
well built of yellow Orphir freestone. The only remaining window is a
small one in the east end of the chancel, 30 inches high, having a
semicircular head, and the jambs splaying inwards from 10½ inches to 20
inches wide. It has a groove for glass.

The Rev. Alex. Pope of Reay, who visited Orphir in 1758, has given a
description of “The Temple of Orphir, or Gerth House,” but there is
little to be gathered from it, and the measurements as given[187] are
evidently wrong. He states, however, that extensive remains, supposed to
be those of the Earls’ Palace at Orphir, had been discovered in
excavating the foundations of the neighbouring farm-buildings.
Indications of these, and of an extensive refuse-heap, are still to be
seen.

The church of Orphir is first mentioned in the Saga in connection with
Earl Paul Hakonson’s residence at Orphir. The church is there referred
to as a splendid structure, and it is not spoken of as recently erected,
or as having been built by Earl Paul. But Earl Hakon, his father, who
had made a pilgrimage to Rome and the Holy Land, is said in the Saga to
have brought back relics which he would doubtless deposit in the church
at Orphir, where he seems to have resided. The probability is that the
church was built by him after his return from his pilgrimage, perhaps as
an expiatory offering for the murder of his cousin, St. Magnus. Earl
Hakon died in 1122, and three out of the six round churches in Britain
had been built before that time.

CHRIST’S CHURCH in Birsay is the first church of which we have any
record in the Saga, and, so far as we know, the first church erected in
the Orkneys after the conversion of the Norwegian inhabitants to
Christianity. It was built by Earl Thorfinn some time about the middle
of the 11th century. Earl Thorfinn made a pilgrimage to Rome about the
year 1050, and it is likely that Christ’s Church would be built after
his return to Orkney, or between 1050 and 1064, the date of his death.
It was the seat of the bishopric previous to the erection of the
cathedral of St. Magnus, and William the Old, who was the first (actual)
bishop, lived to see the bishopric transferred to Kirkwall some time
after 1137.

It is doubtful whether any recognisable traces of the original Christ’s
Church now remain. Neale says, “The parish church, which contains some
fragments of old work, seems to have been the famous Christ’s Church
built by Earl Thorfinn.” But it does not seem at all likely that any
portion of the existing parish church can be as old as the middle of the
11th century. There are remains of an older church, however, beside it,
which are still known as the Christ’s Kirk, and Mr. George Petrie, who
has made a ground-plan of the structure (of which only part of the
foundation remains), has ascertained that it had an apse at the east
end.


[Illustration: WEIR]


The CHURCH OF WEIR, on the island of the same name, consists of chancel
and nave, the extreme length exteriorly being 36 feet, and the width 18½
feet. The nave is 19 feet by 13 feet inside, and the chancel little more
than 7 feet square. The door is in the west end, having parallel jambs
with no rebate. The doorway has a semicircular head, roughly arched with
thin slaty stones set on edge, the arch being set a little back on the
imposts.[188] There are two windows on the south side of the nave, only
one of which appears to be original. It is flat-headed, 22 inches high
and 8 inches wide, the jambs splaying inwards to a width of 27 inches.
The chancel arch, of which a representation is given in the accompanying
plate, is exactly like the doorway. There is one window in the south
side, which seems to have been round-headed, 27 inches high by 11 inches
wide.

Of this chapel Mr. Muir says,[189] “Excepting that at Lybster, in
Caithness, the entrance to the chancel is the most diminutive, not of
primitive date, I have ever seen, the total height being only 4 feet. In
plan, size, and general expression, Weir and Lybster are remarkably
alike, and in all probability both buildings are the work of the same
period, though Lybster is perhaps fully the older of the two.” Sir Henry
Dryden also remarks the similarity of the chapels of Weir and Lybster,
and adds “Probably Weir is of the 12th or 13th century, but the
characteristics are not decisive enough to approximate more closely to
its date.”

It is most probable that this chapel[190] was built by Bishop Bjarni,
the son of Kolbein Hruga, who built the castle on the island of Weir, as
recorded in the Saga. Bjarni was bishop from 1188 to 1223, and would
probably reside on his paternal estate in Weir when not required by the
duties of the episcopate to be in Kirkwall. This period answers to the
indications afforded by the architectural characteristics of the
building, and we have no record of any other person who was likely to
have erected a chapel on this little island. The fact that it is still
called “Cobbie Row’s Chapel” points to its connection with Kolbein
Hruga’s family.


[Illustration: LYBSTER S. MARY]


The CHURCH AT LYBSTER[191] (Reay), in Caithness, corresponds in style
and plan so closely to the church of Weir that it may be described here
briefly. There is no other church in Caithness of any antiquity which
demands special notice. Ecclesiastical sites of early date are thickly
scattered over the county, but the ruins of the buildings themselves
have suffered so much that there is scarcely an architectural feature
left to guide us to conclusions as to their date. The church at Lybster
is fortunately an exception. It consists of chancel and nave, slightly
larger than Weir, and very rudely constructed. There is a doorway with
inclined jambs in the west end, of which a representation is given in
the accompanying plate; but Mr. Muir notices as a singular feature of
the building that there are nowhere traces of windows, although all the
elevations except the east one, which is broken down to a little below
the gable line, remain nearly entire. The entrance to the chancel is of
the same form as the doorway, having inclined jambs. “With regard to
even the probable age of this building,” says Mr. Muir, “I would not
like to venture an opinion. The diversified shapes and sizes of the
stones, and the primitive form and smallness of the entrances to the
nave and chancel, would suggest extreme earliness of date; whilst, on
the other hand, the refined character of the ground-plan would indicate
a period of time not more remote than the 12th century.”


[Illustration: Chancel-Arch of Church at Weir.]


[Illustration: Doorway in West end of Church at Lybster, Reay.]


ST. PETER’S CHURCH, on the Brough of Birsay, a holm of about 40 acres,
separated from the mainland by a channel about 150 yards wide, and dry
at low water, consists of nave, chancel, and apse, all well defined, and
apparently built at the same time, the material being a grey whinstone.
The total length of the building is 57 feet. The nave is 28 feet by 15½
inside, and the chancel about 10 feet square. There is but one doorway,
in the west end of the church. It has parallel jambs without any rebate
for a door.[192] There are the remains of a window in the north wall, 3
feet high by 10½ inches wide, square-headed, and splaying both
internally and externally to a width of 22½ inches. Only the foundations
of the apse remain. The floor was originally level to the end of the
apse, but subsequently there had been a reredos which blocked off the
apse, and then there were steps to the altar, some portion of which
still remains. A stone projection or “seat,” 14 inches high and the same
in width, runs all round the nave. In the north-east and south-east
corners are two circular spaces, 5½ feet in diameter, in one of which
are the remains of a spiral stone staircase. In all probability the
church was twin-towered, like many of the Scandinavian churches dating
from the 13th century. Barry states that this church was dedicated to
St. Peter, but the dedication seems to have been unknown in the
locality[193] in 1627.

There are the remains of a chapel similarly situated on the Brough of
Deerness, at the east end of the Mainland. The Brough of Deerness is an
outlying rock, nearly 100 feet high, and covered with green sward on the
top. The chapel stands near the centre of the area, and is surrounded by
a stone wall enclosing an area of about 60 feet by 45. The chapel, which
is a smaller and ruder building than that on the Brough of Birsay, is a
simple parallelogram of not more than 17 feet by 10 inside, the walls
being from 3 to 4 feet thick. The doorway is in the west end, and there
are the remains of a window in the east end, but the heads of both are
gone. Around the chapel there are the foundations of about a score of
stone-built huts scattered irregularly over the area of the Brough. They
are irregularly built, with a tendency towards the rectangular form, the
walls being from 2½ to 3 feet thick. Several of them are nearly as long
as the church, but not so wide, the internal area measuring about 18
feet by 6. Low[194] states that in his time, notwithstanding the
difficulty and danger of the access to the Brough, “even old age
scrambled its way through a road in many places not six inches broad,
where certain death attended a slip.” Jo. Ben, in 1529, mentions that
people of all classes and conditions were in the habit of climbing up to
the top of the Brough on their hands and knees to visit the chapel
called the “Bairns of Brugh;” and when they had reached the top, “on
their bended knees and with hands joined they offered their
supplications with many incantations to the Bairns of Brugh, throwing
stones and water behind their backs, and making the circuit of the
chapel twice or thrice.” There is still a fine spring on the Brough,
which doubtless had the reputation of a “holy well” in connection with
these superstitious practices. The Brough was fenced with a strong stone
wall toward the land side in Low’s time, and from this and the remains
of the huts he concludes that it had been a rock fort subsequently
converted into a sanctuary by the ecclesiastics.

The old parish church of Deerness, of which Low has preserved three
sketches (one of which is engraved in Hibbert’s Shetland), had the
peculiarity of being twin-towered, as the church on the Brough of Birsay
seems also to have been, and as many of the Scandinavian churches dating
from the 13th century were.[195] Low describes it as having a vaulted
chancel at the east end, of which the twin towers rose from each corner.
The tower on the south-east corner of the chancel was entered by a
doorway opening from the chancel (in the same manner as the one at
Brough of Birsay), and a spiral staircase led to a small apartment or
vestry between the towers, on the second storey. From this apartment was
the entrance to the other tower.

There were three towered churches in Shetland—St. Laurence in West
Burra, St. Magnus at Tingwall, and Ireland Head, but, like the old
church of Deerness, they have long disappeared, and there is no
description of them more precise than the casual notices of Low and
Brand. It is not even quite clear whether they were single-towered or
twin-towered. If single-towered they may have been examples of the rare
form of which Egilsey is now the only remaining instance.


                 XI. MAESHOW AND THE STONES OF STENNIS.


Maeshow, the Orkahaug of the Saga, is connected in such an interesting
way with the Norse history of the Isles that it is necessary to notice
briefly its most peculiar features.

It stands about a mile to the north-east of the great stone ring of
Stennis. Its external appearance is that of a truncated conical mound of
earth, about 300 feet in circumference at the base and 36 feet high,
surrounded by a trench 40 feet wide. Nothing was known of its internal
structure till the year 1861, when it was opened by Mr. Farrer,
M.P.,[196] but the common tradition of the country represented it as the
abode of a goblin, who was named “the Hogboy,”[197] though no one knew
why. When excavated, the mound was found to cover a great cairn of
stones, in the centre of which was a chamber about 15 feet square, the
walls of which still remained entire to a height of 13 feet. A long low
passage led from the west side of the chamber to the exterior of the
mound, a distance of about 54 feet, and on the other three sides of the
chamber there were small cells or _loculi_ entered by openings in the
walls about 2½ feet square at a height of about 3 feet above the floor.


[Illustration: Plan and Section of Maeshow.]


Structurally, Maeshow belongs to a class of chambered sepulchral cairns
of common occurrence in the north of Scotland, but to a special variety
of that class which is peculiar to the Orkneys.[198] These chambered
tombs occur in groups in certain places, thus suggesting the probability
that, as in the great royal cemeteries of early times in Ireland, they
may have been for centuries the gathering places of the tribes and the
burying-places of their kings.

But the most interesting fact connected with Maeshow was the discovery
that a large number of Runic inscriptions had been scratched on the
stones of the interior walls of the chamber. It was evident, from the
height at which the inscriptions occurred, as well as from indications
of the weathering of the stones previous to their being inscribed, that
when the runes were cut the chamber was roofless and partially filled up
with rubbish. The form of the letters of which the inscriptions are
composed is that of the later class of Norse Runes, “which,” says
Professor Munch, “are never older than A.D. 1100 at least.” The majority
of the inscriptions are such as men seeking the shelter or concealment
of the “broken how” might scribble from mere idleness. One gives the
Runic alphabet. A number of others are simple memoranda consisting of
the name of a man and the statement that he “hewed this” or “carved
these runes.” But one of the longer inscriptions supplies the important
information that “the Jorsala-farers broke open the Orkahaug in the
lifetime of the blessed earl.” This seems to imply that the inscription
was carved after the death of “the blessed earl” Rögnvald, or subsequent
to 1158. The Jorsala-farers who accompanied him from Norway in 1152
remained a considerable time in Orkney before the expedition was ready,
and as we learn from the Saga their conduct during that time was such as
would naturally result from the enforced idleness of a numerous body of
rough and uncontrolled adventurers. The “breaking of a how” in the hope
of finding treasure was a common exploit among the Northmen. It seems to
have been done sometimes also as a proof of courage, for the bravest
were not altogether void of superstitious fears. From another part of
the inscription we gather that the Jorsala-farers who broke the Orkahaug
were disappointed in the hope of finding treasure, as it had been
previously carried away. In all probability they were not the first who
had been tempted by the magnitude of the monument to try the venture. On
one of the buttresses, long slabs inserted in the corners of the
chamber, is carved a cross, and on another a dragon, similar in style to
that in the tomb of King Gorm the Old at Jellinge in Denmark, and
bearing also some resemblance to one sculptured on the Runic stone dug
up in St. Paul’s Churchyard, London, and to another at Hunestad in
Scania. The tomb of King Gorm is dated about the middle of the 10th
century. Rafn assigns the stone dug up in London to about the middle of
the 11th century; while the Hunestad example is assigned to about 1150,
which is close on the date of Earl Rögnvald’s expedition to the Holy
Land, which brought the Jorsala-farers to Orkney.


[Illustration: View of Chamber in Maeshow.]


[Illustration: RUBBING FROM MAESHOW TUMULUS.]


Among the names thus carved on the stones of Maeshow are those of
Ingibiorg, Ingigerd, Thorer, Helgi, Ingi, and Arnfinn. All these are
names of persons who are mentioned in the Saga as living in Earl
Rögnvald’s time, and several of whom were closely connected with him.
Ingigerd, his daughter, was married to Eric Slagbrellir, and they had a
daughter named Ingibiorg. Helgi was a particular friend of Earl
Rögnvald’s. Arnfinn was taken prisoner by Earl Harald the morning after
he and his men had spent the Yule-feast day at Orkahaug on his way to
surprise Earl Erlend.[199] There is nothing, however, to identify any of
these names with certainty as the names of the persons mentioned in the
Saga. But the fact that the name Orkahaug, which only occurs once in the
Saga, is not known to occur anywhere else except in the inscription
carved on the walls of Maeshow, referring to the breaking open of the
tumulus, is interesting in more ways than one. It shows that the
Norsemen were ignorant of the origin of the tumulus, which they knew
only as the Orka-haug[200] or “mighty how.” In one of the inscriptions
the writer assigns its construction to the sons of Lodbrok, which is
equivalent to saying that its origin was quite unknown[201] to them.


[Illustration: Ring of Brogar, from the south-west.]


About a mile to the south-west of Maeshow, and scattered over the ness
or tongue of land separating the loch of Stennis from the sea, is a
remarkable group of stone circles and tumuli.[202] The largest of the
circles, the “Ring of Brogar,” having a diameter of 366 feet, encloses
an area of 2½ acres. It is surrounded by a trench 29 feet broad and 6
feet deep. Within the enclosure thirteen stones of the great circle
still remain standing, the stumps of thirteen more are visible, and ten
are lying prostrate. The original number of the stones, says Captain
Thomas, on the presumption that they were placed at nearly equal
distances apart, would have been sixty, so that twenty-four have been
entirely obliterated. The highest stone stands almost 14 feet above the
surface of the ground, and the lowest is about 6 feet, the average being
from 8 to 10 feet. It is difficult to realise the amount of laborious
effort expended in the construction of a work like this, which does not
appeal to the eye like the magnitude of the great mounds around it. But
when one reflects on what is implied in the transportation and erection
of these great stones, and the excavation of a ditch round them of 10
yards wide, 2 yards deep, and 366 yards long, it loses none of its
magnificence in comparison with the more imposing monuments.


[Illustration: Ring of Stennis and Cromlech, from the northward.]


The smaller circle, called the “Ring of Stennis,” is more clearly
monumental than the Ring of Brogar, as it contains the remains of a
cromlech within it. It seems to have consisted originally of twelve
stones placed round the circumference of a circle of about 100 feet in
diameter, and surrounded by a deep and broad trench with a
circumscribing mound, now nearly obliterated. Only two stones of the
circle remain standing, and a third lies prostrate. Peterkin states that
some were thrown down and removed by the tenant of the adjoining lands
in 1814. The cromlech is also thrown down, but one of the supports of
the massive capstone is still standing, and the capstone, which lies
beside it, is 9 feet long by 6 feet broad.


[Illustration: Ring of Stennis, from the westward.]


The Ring of Bookan is a circular space 136 feet in diameter, surrounded
by a trench 44 feet broad and 6 feet deep. There are upwards of twenty
tumuli, some of them very large, in the immediate vicinity.

In the Saga of Olaf, Tryggvi’s son, Stennis is mentioned as the place
where Havard, eldest of the five sons of Earl Thorfinn Hausakliuf, was
slain in battle with his sister’s son Einar. The Saga says:[203]—“Havard
was then at Stæinsnes in Hrossey. There it was they met, and there was a
hard battle, and it was not long till the Earl fell. The place is now
called Havard’s _teigr_.” Teigr is an individual’s share, or allotment,
of the tun or town-land, and the expression might be taken to mean
rather that Havard was buried by simple inhumation than that there was a
cairn or tumulus raised over him, in which case it would have been known
as Havard’s How. But the name of Havard was never connected with the
great tumulus known as Maeshow, and if he was buried in a tumulus at
all, it is more likely that his corpse was burnt with the customary
ceremonies of that heathen time and his ashes placed in a great stone
urn. The grave-mounds of the Viking period in Norway prove this to have
been then the common practice. Such a mound, enclosing such an urn, was
opened at Stennis by Mr. Farrer, M.P., in 1853. This tumulus, if not
Havard’s, was apparently Norse, and being the largest in the
neighbourhood of Stennis, must have been that of a person of great
distinction.

The fact that the Norsemen at this early period (about A.D. 970) called
this place Steins-ness, shows that it was known to them, only as it is
to us, as the ness of the monumental stones. If they had had anything to
do with the erection of any of these monuments, in all probability we
should have had some incidental record of the fact in one or other of
the Sagas.


                   XII. MOUSA AND THE PICTISH TOWERS.


The little island of Mousa (the Mosey of the Saga), lying off the
Mainland of Shetland, is interesting as containing the best preserved
specimen of the “towers of defence,” which were the strongholds of the
native inhabitants previous to the Norse invasion.


[Illustration]


The tower of Mousa, of which a view is here given, consists of a
circular dry-built wall, 15 feet thick at the base, enclosing an area or
circular court 30 feet in diameter, and open to the sky, so as to admit
light to the ranges of windows which open from the galleries towards the
interior. The doorway leading through the wall into this interior court
is the only opening to the outside of the tower. From the court other
openings in the wall give access to small ovoid chambers in the
thickness of the wall on the ground-floor, and to a stair which ascends
to the upper galleries. Above the chambers on the ground-floor the wall
is carried up hollow, or rather there are two concentric walls with a
space of about 3½ feet between them, which is divided into storeys or
galleries by horizontal courses of transverse slabs, which bind the two
walls together. Thus each of these courses of horizontal slabs forms the
roof of the gallery beneath it, and serves as a floor to the one above
it.

These singularly-constructed towers were once thickly planted over the
whole of the northern mainland of Scotland, as well as over the most of
the Northern and Western Isles.[204] A number of them have been
excavated of late years, and the results of these excavations[205]
furnish us with interesting evidences of the conditions of life among
the people who lived in them. The relics that have been obtained from
them have no connection as a class with those that are usually found in
the cisted graves and chambered tombs of earlier times.[206] But judging
from the general character of their included remains, the people who
lived in these towers were possessed of a considerable degree of
civilisation. There is abundant evidence that they were not only expert
hunters and fishers, but that they kept flocks and herds, grew grain and
ground it by hand-mills,[207] practised the arts of spinning and
weaving, had ornaments of gold of curious workmanship, and were not
unskilled workers in bronze and iron. Their pottery was rude, but not
ruder than the pottery manufactured and used for common or domestic
purposes in some of the islands of Scotland within the present century.
It is true that silver denarii of the Roman Emperors Antoninus, Trajan,
and Vespasian, have been found in the outbuildings connected with the
Broch or “Pictish Tower” of Lingrow at Scapa in Orkney; but it is to be
noticed that upwards of 4000 of these Roman denarii have been found in
Scandinavia, where the Romans never were, and found so often associated
with relics of the Viking period as to suggest that they were carried
thither some centuries after their dates.

The Tower of Mousa, Moseyjar-borg, is twice mentioned by the Saga
writers. The earliest notice occurs in the Saga of Egill Skalagrimson,
the warrior-poet, and refers to a period about A.D. 900. It is there
stated that Björn Brynulfson, fleeing from Norway with Thora Roald’s
daughter, because his father would not allow him to celebrate his
marriage with her, was shipwrecked on the island of Mousa, landed his
cargo, and lived in the Borg through the winter, celebrating his
marriage in it, and afterwards sailed for Iceland. The second notice of
Mousa,[208] singularly enough, occurs on an occasion somewhat similar to
this, when Earl Erlend Ungi fled from Orkney with Margaret, the widow of
Maddad, Earl of Athole, and was besieged in the Borg by Earl Harald
(Maddadson), who was displeased at the prospect of having Erlend for a
step-father.


                     XIII. REMAINS OF THE NORTHMEN.


Turning from the pages of the Saga to the scenes of the events which it
records, we find, both in the topography and traditions of the
localities, and in the customs and characteristics of the people,
abundant evidence of the substantial truth of the narrative.

The range of territory possessed and occupied by the Norsemen may still
be distinguished on the map of Scotland by the prevalence of Norse
place-names. In Shetland and Orkney the topography is altogether Norse.
In Caithness and Sutherland there is a core of Celtic topography in the
central mountain districts, while the Norse names spread out through the
valleys, forming a broad fringe along the seaboard, and occupying the
whole angle of lowland Caithness. But south of Ekkialsbakki they rapidly
thin out, and finally disappear, with a few outlying instances, in
Moray. The permanent dominions of the Northmen in the mainland of
Scotland were limited to the earldom proper, the southern boundary of
which was the Kyle of Sutherland. The Saga says they conquered the
country as far south as Ekkialsbakki; and though they sometimes extended
their power over parts of Ross and Moray, and even made a raid on one
occasion as far south as Fife, they made no permanent lodgment south of
the Moray Firth, and their presence in Ross has but slightly affected
the topography between the Kyle of Sutherland and the Beauly Firth.

In the Hebrides the Norse names, though much disguised by contact with
the Celtic, still form a considerable if not a preponderating element in
the topography, and their old Norse name, “Sudreyar,” still survives in
the title of the Bishop of Sodor and Man. Along the western seaboard of
the Scottish mainland, from Cape Wrath to the Mull of Kintyre, the
Northmen have left their traces more sparsely, but very distinctly, upon
the topography. In Bute, Arran, and the Cumbraes, and on the shores of
the Solway Firth, the topography also shows the influence of the
Northern element, exerted during the existence of the Norse “Kingdom of
Man and the Isles.”

There are many remnants of the older usages[209] in the peculiar local
customs; and in the characteristics of the people of the Northern Isles
there are also, of necessity, many striking resemblances to those of the
Scandinavian race. The elucidation of these, however, would lead into a
field far too wide to be entered on here. The language of the early
colonists, which must have survived as long as the Islands were governed
“according to the Norse law-book and the ancient usages,” seems to have
died out rapidly after they were transferred to Scottish rule. Yet Jo.
Ben found it existing in Rendal in Orkney in 1529; and it is stated[210]
that in 1593 a clergyman, named Magnus Norsk, who was ordained to a
Shetland parish, went to Norway to learn the Norse language, in order to
qualify himself for his ministry, because the Shetlanders at that time
understood no other tongue. Even so late as 1774, Low found people in
Foula who could repeat the Lord’s Prayer in Norse, and he gives
thirty-five stanzas of an old Norse ballad which he took down from oral
recitation. In the Faroe Isles a large number of these ballads and
metrical tales have been collected.[211] There can be no doubt that they
were equally common in the neighbouring island groups, but no literary
antiquary possessed of the requisite knowledge seems to have visited
Shetland and Orkney in time to rescue them from oblivion.

The curious literary fragment, taken down phonetically by Low, who was
completely ignorant of the language, is plainly akin to the old
Scandinavian _Kæmpeviser_. The story is based on the _Sörlathattr_, one
of the scenes of which is laid in the island of Hoy. The main incidents
of the older poem are as follow:—Hedin, a prince of Serkland, had sworn
mutual brotherhood with Hogni, King of Denmark. Nothing occurred to
disturb their friendship until Hogni went on a war expedition. Hedin,
wandering in the woods, fell in with a sorceress, from whom he received
a magic philtre to enable him to win the love of Hilda, Hogni’s
daughter. The result was that he ran off with her in a splendid ship
belonging to Hogni, and made for Serkland. When Hogni came home he set
off in pursuit, and came up with them at the island of Hoy. There they
both landed with their men, and a furious battle commenced. Odin (who
enjoyed a good fight) cast a spell upon the combatants, so that they
were obliged to fight on without ceasing, until a Christian should come
who should have the hardihood to mingle in the fray, of which Hilda was
doomed to be all the time an agonised spectator. At last Olaf Tryggvi’s
son came to the Orkneys, and Ivar Liomi, one of his men who landed in
Hoy, went into the fight and broke the spell, killed Hedin and Hogni,
and bore off the prize.[212]

The story of the Shetland ballad is that Hiluge, a young nobleman at the
court of Norway, made love to the king’s daughter Hildina, and was
rejected by her, though her father supported his pretensions to her
hand. When the king and Hiluge were away at the wars, an Earl of Orkney
came to Norway, and found such favour with Hildina that she consented to
fly with him to the Orkneys. When the king and Hiluge returned and
discovered what had happened in their absence, they set sail, with a
great host, in pursuit of the fugitives. Hildina persuaded the earl to
go unarmed to meet her father, and ask for his pardon and peace. The
king was pleased to forgive him, and to grant his consent to their
union. But now Hiluge, by artfully working on the king’s mind, stirs up
his latent wrath against the earl, and induces him to revoke his
consent. The result is, that he decides that Hiluge and the earl shall
meet in single combat, and fight it out to the death of one or other.
Hiluge was victorious; and, not content with the death of his enemy, he
cut off his head and cast it into Hildina’s lap with taunting words.
Hildina answered his taunts boldly, and conceived a bloody revenge. But
she must now follow him to Norway, where he renewed his courtship. Ere
long she seemed to relent, and gave him her promise, but besought her
father to grant her this boon, that she herself should fill out the
first wine-cup at the bridal. Her request was granted. The guests came,
the feast was set, and Hildina filled up the wine-cups for them. The
wine was drugged, and they were all cast into a deep sleep, from which
nothing could awake them. Hildina now caused her father to be carried
forth, and set fire to the house. Hiluge, awaking in the midst of the
burning, cried out for mercy. Hildina replied that she would give him
the same mercy as he had given to her earl, and left him to perish in
the flames.


[Illustration: sword]


The dialect of the ballad resembles that which prevailed in Norway in
the middle of the 15th century, but presents several peculiarities of
local origin. The allusions in it to St. Magnus show that it cannot be
older than the 12th century in its present form, although the story of
Hedin and Hogni, on which it appears to have been founded, belongs to
the heathen time.

Looking at the number of Runic monuments in the island of Man,[213] and
the beauty of their workmanship, it certainly seems surprising that none
of these characteristic works of northern art should have survived in
the Orkneys.[214] Previous to the discovery of the inscriptions in
Maeshow, the only Rune-inscribed monument known within the bounds of the
ancient earldom was the stone in the churchyard of Crosskirk,
Northmavine, Shetland, described by Low, which reads (according to his
imperfect copy) “Bid pray for the soul of ——,” and consequently belongs
to the Christian time. That there were similar monuments in other
places, however, is shown by the recent discovery of a Runic fragment at
Aithsvoe, Cunningsburgh, Shetland.[215] It is a mere fragment of the
terminal part of a monumental inscription, incised on the edge of the
stone, consisting of the letters KVIMIK, which Professor Stephens reads
as the concluding part of the customary formula, “—— hewed me,” _i.e._
carved this stone.

But perhaps the most interesting and suggestive remains of the Northmen
are those that have been from time to time recovered from the soil which
they made their own—the relics which were actually possessed by the men
and women of the Saga time; the weapons they used, and the ornaments
they wore. In the grave-mounds of the heathen period, the warrior Viking
still lies as he was laid, with his shield at his shoulder, and his
sword ready to his hand.

The sword here figured, which is of a distinctively Scandinavian type,
was dug up in making the railway near Gorton, in Morayshire, and is now
in the museum of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. It is 35 inches
in length, of excellent workmanship, damascened along the centre of the
blade, and the pommel and recurved guard are beautifully inlaid with
silver. A number of fragments of shield-bosses and broken swords, from
Orkney graves, are also in the museum. The swords are chiefly of the
older form, with straight guard and massive square or triangular pommel.
In one of the interments at Westray the scabbard-tip here figured was
found, and in others the bones of the dog and horse were found along
with the human skeleton, indicating the continuance in Orkney of the
sepulchral rites which prevailed in the heathen time in Norway.


[Illustration: Scabbard-tip]


For at least a century and a half after the establishment of the Norse
earldom in Orkney and Shetland, the heathen Norsemen practised the
burial customs which they had brought with them from Norway. Sigurd,
Eystein’s son, the first Earl of Orkney, was buried in a cairn on
Ekkialsbakki, (and his grave-mound was known as Sigurd’s How
(_Siwardhoch_) in the 12th century,[216]) and Torf Einar caused his men
to rear a cairn over the remains of Halfdan Hálegg, the son of Harald
Harfagri, whom he offered to Odin in Rinansey.

A vivid picture of the ceremonies attending the burial of a Norse chief
of the 10th century is preserved in the narrative of an eye-witness, in
the work of an Arab geographer;[217] and all its details are amply
confirmed by the contents of the grave-mounds of the period. Ahmed Ibn
Fozlan, being in the country on the upper part of the Volga (then
occupied by the Norsemen), as ambassador from the Caliph Al Moktader
(A.D. 907-932), resolved to see for himself whether what he had heard of
their burial customs was true. A great chief among the Norsemen had just
died, and Ibn Fozlan describes, with curious minuteness of detail, the
strange things he witnessed on the occasion. He gives a most
characteristic picture of the drinking habits of the Northmen. “This
nation,” he says, “is much given to wine and drink, by day and night,
and it is not uncommon for one or another of them to die with beakers in
their hands. When a chieftain dies, his family ask his maids
(concubines) and men-servants, ‘Which of you will die with him?’ One of
them will say, ‘I,’ and by this promise he is bound, and cannot revoke
it. If he should desire to do so, he is not permitted.” It is mostly the
maids who are willing to be thus sacrificed, says Ibn Fozlan, and on
this occasion it was one of them who offered to die with her lord. She
was accordingly given in charge to the other servants, who were to
indulge her in every wish till the day of her sacrifice; and he adds,
that “every day she drank, sang, was lively and merry.” Meantime the
dead man had been laid in a temporary grave, and strong drink, fruits,
and musical instruments placed beside him, as if to relieve the tedium
of his confinement until the completion of the preparations for the
funeral rites. A splendid suit of clothing was prepared for him, his
ship was hauled up on the strand, and placed on four posts erected for
the purpose. A bed was prepared in the midst of the deck, with a
tent-like canopy over it, and covered with gold-embroidered cloth. In
the preparation of this bed there comes on the scene an old hag, “whom
they called the dead man’s angel.” It was she who took charge of the
making of the dead man’s clothing and all needful arrangements, and she
it was also who was to put the girl to death. “I saw her,” says Ibn
Fozlan; “she was sallow and stern.” While the “dead man’s angel” was
arranging the bed, the multitude were away at the temporary grave,
disinterring the corpse. They clothed him in the rich garments provided
for the occasion, and then bore him to the ship, where he was laid in
state under the canopy. “So they laid him on the mattress, and stayed
him up with pillows, then brought the strong drink, the fruits, and
odoriferous herbs, and set them by his side, placing bread, meat, and
onions also before him. Then came a man forward with a dog, hewed it
into two portions, and cast them into the ship. So brought they all the
dead man’s weapons and laid them by his side. Then they led forth two
horses, made them run till they were covered with sweat, then hewed them
in pieces with the sword, and cast the flesh into the ship. So also they
brought forth two oxen, hewed them in pieces, and cast them into the
ship. Next they came with a cock and hen, slew them, and cast them also
into the ship.” In the meantime the woman who was to die kept going
backwards and forwards in and out of the tent. At last they led her away
to an object which they had made in the form of the framework of a
door—two posts, with a cross piece on the top, or, as is suggested, a
substitute for a trilithon. “She set her feet on the palms of men’s
hands, stepped up on the frame, and said some words in their tongue,
after which they made her stand down. Then they lifted her up a second
and third time, and she went through the same ceremony. Now they handed
her a hen, the head of which she cut off and cast away, but the body
they cast into the ship. I asked my interpreter what it was that the
woman had said. He answered, she said the first time, ‘Lo! I see my
father and my mother;’ the second time, ‘Lo! here I see seated all my
deceased relations;’ the third time, ‘Lo! here I see my master seated in
paradise—paradise, beautiful and green, my master surrounded by his men
and his menials; he calls for me; bring me to him.’ Thereupon they
conveyed her to the ship. She took the bracelets from her arms, and gave
them to the crone whom they called ‘the dead man’s angel;’ and the rings
from her ankles, and gave them to the two young girls who had attended
her, and who were ‘the dead man’s angel’s daughters.’ Then came men with
shields and staves, and brought her a beaker of strong drink. She sang a
song, and drank it out. Folk said to me that she thereby took leave of
her friends. They reached her a second beaker. She took it, and sang a
long time. The old hag bade her hasten to empty it, and go into the tent
where her dead master was. I watched her; she was out of herself. In
attempting to go into the tent she stuck by the head in the space
between the tent and the ship. The old hag caught hold of her by the
head and dragged her in with her, while the men commenced to beat their
shields with the staves, that her shrieks might not be heard, and so
frighten other girls, and make them unwilling to die with their lords.”
The sequel is too horrible to be given as it stands in the old Arab’s
plain-spoken narrative. A cord was finally wound round her neck, at the
ends of which two men pulled, while the “dead man’s angel” stabbed her
to the heart with a broad-bladed knife. Then the relatives of the dead
man set fire to the pile. A storm that was just beginning to rage fanned
the flames, and drove them aloft to a great height. A Norseman who was
standing by said to Ibn Fozlan “You Arabs are fools. You take the man
whom you most have loved and honoured, and put him down into the earth,
where vermin and worms devour him. We, on the contrary, burn him up in a
twinkling, and he goes straight to paradise.” After the pile was
consumed to ashes they raised a great-mound over the spot, and set up on
it a pillar made of a tree-trunk, on which they carved the names of the
dead man and of their king.

The burial usages, however, were not always the same. Great men were
buried with the pomp and ceremony befitting their rank, while meaner men
were simply reduced to ashes and inhumed in a clay urn, or in a stone
pot, not unfrequently in the stone cooking-kettle that had served them
when in life.[218] This burial in stone urns, or in cooking vessels of
steatite, is of common occurrence in the grave-mounds of the Viking
period in Norway, and is also not unfrequently found in Orkney and
Shetland.


[Illustration: Bronze brooch]


Associated with such burials in Norway there are occasionally found the
peculiar brooches which are characteristic of the later Pagan time.[219]
Although they occur perhaps more frequently with unburnt burials, they
link on with the custom of cremation. Thus they afford a valuable index
to the chronology of these remains in Scotland, because the Pagan period
of the Scandinavian occupation may be said to be limited to the time
between the expedition of Harald Harfagri and the battle of Clontarf
(872-1014). These brooches are found in Scandinavian graves of this
period, in Scotland, England, Ireland, Normandy, Russia, and Iceland—in
short, wherever the heathen Vikings effected a settlement. In Scotland
they have been found in various places—in Sutherland, in Caithness, in
Orkney, in the Hebrides, and even in remote St. Kilda. The specimen here
figured, which is now in the Museum of the Society of Antiquaries of
Scotland is one of a pair found in a stone cist on a mound which covered
the remains of a “Pictish Tower” at Castletown in Caithness.[220] They
are usually found in pairs, one near each shoulder of the skeleton. This
corresponds with the statement of an ancient Arab writer, that the Norse
women used to wear such brooches in pairs on their breasts.[221]


[Illustration: Comb]


The most remarkable discovery of these characteristic Scandinavian
interments that has hitherto occurred in Scotland was made in the island
of Westray, Orkney, in 1849, by Mr. William Rendall.[222] A number of
graves were found in the sandy links near Pierowall (the Hofn of the
Saga), in some of which were swords and shield-bosses, indicating that
the skeletons were those of men. But in one a pair of tortoise or
shell-shaped brooches and a trefoil ornament were the only objects found
with the skeleton. In another, a pair of these brooches were found on
the breast, and a pair of combs, of the form here figured, lay on either
side of the neck, apparently as they had fallen out of the hair. In a
third, a pair of brooches, a pair of combs, and a bronze pin, were
found. It appears from these examples that the brooches undoubtedly
belonged to women, and that the warriors were usually buried with sword
and shield and “panoply of war;” and, as we read in Ibn Fozlan’s
account, the dog and the horse of the deceased appear also to have been
sacrificed at the grave, and interred with him, in Orkney as well as on
the banks of the Volga.

But we meet with few memorials of the daily life of the Norsemen beyond
those which have been buried with them in the early period of their
occupation of the Islands. Christianity abolished the custom of burying
such relics with the dead, and for the remains of the Christian period
we must look to the yet unexcavated sites of the _skális_ and homesteads
of which we read in the Saga. It would be equally interesting to the
archæologist, and instructive to the historian, to be able to compare
the relics from such sites as those of Kolbein Hruga’s castle in Weir,
the castle of which Blán was the keeper in Damsey, or the _skáli_ of
Swein Asleifson at Langskail in Gairsay, with the extensive collections
obtained in recent years from the “Pictish Towers” of Orkney, which have
given us such suggestive glimpses of the domestic life of the period
preceding the Norse occupation.

It gives a curious feeling of reality to the ancient legends when we can
thus handle the blades and bucklers of which we read such stirring
stories, and remember that it was because the Norse sword was then the
longest, and the Norse arm the strongest, that we now read the earliest
chapters of the history of northern Scotland in the guise of an Iceland
Saga.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.


A.D.

795. First appearance of the Norse Vikings in the Western Seas. They
      plunder the Isle of Rachrin.

798. Invasion of the Isle of Man by the Norsemen. Inispatrick burned.

802. I Columbkill burned by the Norsemen.

806. I Columbkill again plundered by the Norsemen, and sixty-eight men
      of the monastery slain.

807. First invasion of the mainland of Ireland by the Norsemen.

815. Turgesius (Thorkel?), chief of the invading Northmen, establishes
      himself as king of the foreigners in Ireland, making Armagh the
      capital of the kingdom.

824. Bangor, in the north of Ireland, the seat of the monastery of St.
      Comhgall, burned, and the bishop and clergy slain by the Northmen.

843. Union of the Picts and Scots under Kenneth M’Alpin, founder of the
      Scottish dynasty.

853. Arrival of Olaf the White in Ireland. He seizes Dublin, establishes
      himself there as king, makes an expedition to Scotland, and
      besieges and takes Dumbarton.

872. Harald Harfagri becomes sole King of Norway; makes an expedition
      against the western Vikings, who have established their viking
      station in Orkney, drives them from their haunts, and subdues
      Shetland, Orkney, the Hebrides, and Man. He gives Orkney and
      Shetland, as an earldom of Norway, to Rögnvald, Earl of Mœri,
      father of Hrólf (Rollo), the conqueror of Normandy.

875. Earl Sigurd Eysteinson, who had received the earldom of Orkney from
      his brother Rögnvald, Earl of Mœri, forms an alliance with
      Thorstein the Red, son of Olaf the White, King of Dublin. They
      invade the northern mainland of Scotland, and subdue Caithness and
      Sutherland as far as Ekkialsbakki. Thorstein the Red is shortly
      afterwards killed in Caithness; and Earl Sigurd dies, and is
      buried under a cairn at Ekkialsbakki.

893. Einar (Torf Einar) slays Halfdan Hálegg, one of the sons of Harald
      Harfagri, and buries him under a cairn in North Ronaldsay.

933. Death of Harald Harfagri. Eirik Bloodyaxe, his son, becomes King of
      Norway. About this time the name “Scotia” and “Scotland,”
      previously applied to Ireland, is first given to North Britain,
      which had formerly been called Caledonia, Pictavia, or Alban.

950. Fall of King Eirik Bloodyaxe, and of Arnkell and Erlend, sons of
      Torf Einar, and Earls of Orkney, in battle in England.

963. Thorfinn Hausakliuf Earl of Orkney. The sons of Eirik Bloodyaxe
      arrive in Orkney.

980. Sigurd Hlödverson becomes Earl of Orkney.

986. I Columbkill plundered by the Norsemen, and the abbot and fifteen
      of the clerics slain.

992. Olaf Tryggvi’s son, while on a roving expedition, is baptized by a
      hermit in the Scilly Isles.

995. Olaf Tryggvi’s son becomes King of Norway, and immediately
      establishes Christianity by the strong hand. Returning from a
      western cruise, on his way to Norway he finds Earl Sigurd
      Hlödverson by chance at Osmondwall in the Orkneys, and obliges him
      to profess Christianity, and to promise to establish the true
      faith in the Orkneys.

1000. Fall of King Olaf Tryggvi’s son at the battle of Swalder in
      Norway.

1014. Battle of Clontarf, near Dublin, in which Sigurd Hlödverson, Earl
      of Orkney, fell. Thorfinn, his son, is made Earl of Caithness and
      Sutherland by Malcolm II., King of Scots, his maternal
      grandfather.

1015. Olaf Haraldson (afterwards St. Olaf) becomes King of Norway.

1018. Battle of Ulfreksfiord, in which Earl Einar is vanquished by
      Eyvind Urarhorn and King Conchobhar.

1019. Einar (Wrymouth), Earl of Orkney, slain by Thorkel Fóstri at
      Sandwick, in Deerness, Orkney.

1020. The Earls Thorfinn and Brúsi acknowledge the suzerainty of King
      Olaf the Holy over the Orkneys.

1028. Olaf the Holy driven from Norway by Canute the Great, King of
      England and Denmark.

1030. Fall of King Olaf the Holy at the battle of Stiklestad.

1034. Death of Malcolm II., King of Scots. According to the Saga, “Kali
      Hundason takes the kingdom,” and according to the Scottish
      historians Duncan I. succeeds to the throne in Scotland. Mission
      of Einar Thambarskelfir and Kalf Arneson to Russia to offer their
      aid to Magnus, son of King Olaf the Holy, to obtain the throne of
      Norway.

1035. Magnus the Good, son of Olaf Haraldson (the Holy), succeeds to the
      throne of Norway, and Rögnvald Brusison becomes Earl of Orkney.

1039. Duncan I., King of Scots, slain by Macbeth, who becomes king.

1047. Magnus the Good dies in Denmark, and is succeeded by Harald
      Sigurdson, surnamed Hardradi.

1050. Einar Thambarskelfir and the sons of Eindridi slain in Norway by
      Harald Hardradi.

1054. Macbeth defeated by Malcolm (Canmore), son of Duncan.

1057. Malcolm Canmore crowned at Scone.

1064. Death of Thorfinn Sigurdson, Earl of Caithness and Orkney. He is
      succeeded by his sons Paul and Erlend, and his widow, Ingibiorg
      (according to the Saga) is married to Malcolm Canmore.

1066. Fall of King Harald Sigurdson (Hardradi) at the battle of Stamford
      Bridge, near York, in which Harald Godwinson was victor. His son
      Olaf (Kyrre) and the Orkney Earls, Paul and Erlend, who were with
      him in the battle, receive peace from the conqueror and liberty to
      return to Orkney. Olaf Kyrre succeeds to the throne of Norway.

1067. Malcolm Canmore marries Margaret, sister of Edgar Atheling.

1093. Malcolm Canmore killed at Alnwick. Death of King Olaf Kyrre, and
      accession of Magnus Barelegs to the throne of Norway. He makes an
      expedition to the west, ravages the Scottish coasts, and assists
      Muirceartach in the capture of Dublin.

1098. King Magnus makes a second expedition to the west, seizes the
      Earls of Orkney, Paul and Erlend, and sends them both to Norway
      (where they died); places his own son, Sigurd, over the Orkneys;
      and overruns the Hebrides, Kintyre, and Man.

1103. Magnus, King of Norway, slain in Ireland. His son, Sigurd, goes
      from Orkney to Norway, and succeeds to the kingdom jointly with
      his brothers Eystein and Olaf. Magnus Erlendson (St. Magnus), and
      Hakon, Paul’s son, succeed to the earldom of Orkney.

1106. Accession of Alexander I. to the throne of Scotland.

1107. King Sigurd (Magnusson) sets out on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
      which occupies him for three years. He is thenceforth called
      Sigurd, the Jorsala-farer.

1115. Magnus Erlendson (St. Magnus) slain in Egilsey by his cousin
      Hakon, Paul’s son.

1124. Death of Alexander I., and accession of David I., King of Scots.

1130. Death of King Sigurd, the Jorsala-farer, and accession to the
      throne of Norway of King Harald Gilli, an illegitimate son of King
      Magnus Barelegs, from the Hebrides.

1136. Harald Gilli slain by Sigurd Slembidiakn. Rögnvald (Kali) Kolson
      obtains the earldom of Orkney from Earl Páll, son of Hakon, who is
      carried off to Athole by Swein Asleifson.

1139. Death of Sigurd Slembidiakn. Visit of Bishop John of Athole to
      Orkney. Harald Maddadson, son of Maddad, Earl of Athole, shares
      the earldom of Caithness and Orkney with Earl Rögnvald (Kali).

1151. Earl Rögnvald and Erling Skakki leave Norway to prepare for their
      pilgrimage to Jerusalem. The Jorsala-farers winter in Orkney.

1152. Earl Rögnvald leaves the Orkneys on his pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
      King Eystein comes to Orkney from Norway, and seizing Earl Harald
      Maddadson at Thurso obtains from him an acknowledgment of his
      suzerainty over the Orkneys.

1153. Death of David I., King of Scotland, and accession of Malcolm the
      Maiden.

1155. Earl Rögnvald returns from Palestine. Erlend Ungi receives
      Rögnvald’s mother, Margaret, in marriage, and is shortly
      afterwards slain by the Earls Rögnvald and Harald.

1158. Earl Rögnvald slain at Calder in Caithness by Thorbiörn Klerk.
      Earl Harald becomes sole ruler of Caithness and Orkney.

1165. Malcolm the Maiden dies at Jedburgh, and is succeeded by King
      William the Lion.

1168. Death of William the Old, first Bishop of Orkney.

1176. Magnus Erlingson becomes King of Norway. Harald Ungi (son of Eirik
      Slagbrellir by a daughter of Earl Rögnvald) receives from King
      Magnus the title of earl and half of the Orkneys, and from King
      William the Lion half of Caithness, and is subsequently defeated
      and slain in Caithness by Earl Harald Maddadson.

1184. Magnus Erlingson, King of Norway, slain by King Sverrir, who
      succeeds him.

1188. Death of William II., Bishop of Orkney.

1192. Canonisation of Rögnvald (Kali), Earl of Orkney, who was killed by
      Thorbiörn Klerk.

1194. The Eyjarskeggiar collect forces in Orkney, and attempt to place
      Sigurd, son of Magnus Erlingson, on the throne of Norway, but are
      defeated, and nearly all slain, by King Sverrir at Floruvogr, near
      Bergen.

1195. Earl Harald Maddadson, compromised by this expedition, goes to
      Norway with Bishop Bjarni, lays his head at the king’s feet,
      saying that he is now an old man, and entirely in the king’s
      power. He is pardoned by King Sverrir, but on condition of
      forfeiting to the crown of Norway the whole of Shetland, which
      does not again form part of the domain of the Norwegian Earls of
      Orkney till 1379.

1202. King William the Lion marches north to Eysteinsdal on the borders
      of Caithness, with a great army, to take revenge for the
      mutilation of Bishop John, and the expulsion of the deputies of
      Rögnvald Gudrodson from Caithness by Earl Harald. Harald purchases
      peace by a payment of 2000 marks.

1206. Death of Earl Harald Maddadson. He is succeeded by his surviving
      sons, John and David. Thorfinn, his eldest son, died in Roxburgh
      Castle, where he was confined as a hostage, and had been mutilated
      by King William the Lion.

1214. Death of King William the Lion, and accession of Alexander II. to
      the throne of Scotland. Death of David, son of Harald Maddadson.
      His surviving brother John becomes sole Earl of Orkney and
      Caithness.

1222. Burning of Bishop Adam at Halkirk in Caithness, by the enraged
      peasantry. The King of Scots caused the hands and feet to be hewed
      from a number of those who were present at the burning, and many
      of them died in consequence.

1223. Death of Bishop Bjarni, and consecration of Jofreyr to the see of
      the Orkneys.

1231. Earl John slain at Thurso. The line of the ancient Norwegian Earls
      of Orkney having become extinct by his death, King Alexander II.
      creates Magnus, son of Gilbride, Earl of Angus, Earl of Caithness,
      and separating Sutherland into another earldom, gives it to
      William, son of Hugh Freskyn.

1239. Death of Magnus, Earl of Caithness and Orkney.

1243. Death of Gilbert, Bishop of Caithness.

1247. Death of Jofreyr, Bishop of Orkney.

1249. Death of Alexander II., King of Scots, at Kerrera, Argyllshire.

1256. Death of Gilbride II., Earl of Orkney.

1263. Expedition of King Hakon Hakonson, of Norway, to Scotland; he is
      defeated at Largs, and dies at Kirkwall.

1266. Cession of the Hebrides and Man to Scotland by treaty between
      Magnus IV., King of Norway, and Alexander III., King of Scotland.

1273. Death of Magnus, son of Gilbride, Earl of Orkney.

1276. Magnus, son of Magnus, made Earl of Orkney by King Magnus
      Hakonson, at Tunsberg.

1281. Marriage of King Eirik Magnusson to Margaret, daughter of King
      Alexander II. of Scotland.

1283. Death of Margaret, Queen of Norway.

1284. Margaret, infant daughter of Eirik, King of Norway, recognised as
      heiress to the Scottish throne. Death of Magnus Magnusson, Earl of
      Orkney.

1286. Death of King Alexander III. of Scotland.

1289. Betrothal of the Princess Margaret, the Maiden of Norway, to
      Prince Edward of England.

1290. Death of Margaret, the Maiden of Norway, off the coast of Orkney,
      on her way to Scotland.

1293. Marriage of King Eirik Magnusson of Norway to Isabella, daughter
      of Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick.

1300. Appearance at Bergen of the false Margaret, a German woman who
      gave herself out as the “Maiden of Norway,” daughter of King Eirik
      and Queen Margaret, stating that she had been “sold” by Ingibiorg
      Erlingsdatter, and spirited away by parties who had an interest in
      her disappearance.

1301. The false Margaret is burnt as an impostor at Nordness in Bergen,
      and her husband beheaded.

1310. Death of John, Earl of Orkney.

1312. Treaty of Perth (1266) renewed at Inverness.

1314. Battle of Bannockburn.

1333. Battle of Halidon Hill. Death of Malise, Earl of Stratherne.

1334. Forfeiture of the earldom of Stratherne, and marriage of Isabella,
      daughter of Malise, Earl of Stratherne, Caithness and Orkney, to
      William, Earl of Ross. Malise goes to Norway.

1353. Erngisl Suneson, son-in-law of Malise, Earl of Stratherne, made
      Earl of Orkney.

1375. King Hakon grants the earldom of Orkney for one year to Alexander
      de Ard, who resigns all his lands in Caithness to King Robert II.

1379. Henry St. Clair made Earl of Orkney and Shetland by King Hakon
      Magnusson, at Marstrand.

1382. Bishop William of Orkney slain.

1389. Malise Sperra slain near Scalloway by Henry, Earl of Orkney.

1392. Death of Erngisl Suneson.

1397. Union Treaty of Calmar, by which Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, were
      made one kingdom.

1400 (_circa_). Death of Earl Henry St. Clair.

1418 (_circa_). Death of Earl Henry (II.) St. Clair.

1420. Bishop Thomas Tulloch made commissioner in the Orkneys for the
      King of Norway.

1423. David Menzies of Wemyss made commissioner in the Orkneys for the
      King of Norway.

1434. William St. Clair made Earl of Orkney.

1468. Contract of marriage between King James III. of Scotland and
      Margaret, Princess of Denmark, and impignoration of the islands of
      Orkney and Shetland for the Princess’s dowry.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          GENEALOGICAL TABLES.


               I. THE NORSE LINE OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.


    IVAR UPPLENDINGAJARL.

    Eystein Glumra.

    Rögnvald, Earl of Mœri, d. 890.
    Gave the earldom of Orkney to his brother. Sigurd, 1st Earl of Mœri,
       d. 874.

    Guttorm, Earl of Orkney, d. 875.

    Ivar, d. 870.
    Thórir the Silent, m. daughter of Harald Harfagri.
    Hrólf, conqueror of Normandy, d. 931.  Hallad, Earl of Orkney.
    Hrollaug.
    Torf Einar, Earl of Orkney,  d. circa  910.

    William, Earl of Normandy, d. 942.

    Arnkell, Earl of Orkney, d. 950. Erlend, Earl of Orkney,
    d. 950. Thorfinn Hausakliuf, Earl of Orkney, d. circa
    963; m. Grelauga, daughter of Duncan, Earl of Duncansbay.

    Richard, Earl of Normandy, d. 1002.

    Richard II., Earl of Normandy, d. 1026. Emma, m. (1) King Ethelred,
       (2) King Canute.
    (1) Edward, K. of England, d. 1066.
    (2) Hardicanute, K. of England and Denmark, d. 1042.

    Arnfinn, Earl of Orkney, m. Ragnhild, daughter of Eirik Bloodyaxe.
    Havard, Earl of Orkney, m. Ragnhild. Liot, Earl of Orkney, m.
       Ragnhild.
    Skuli.
    Hlödver, Earl of Orkney, d. circa 980.
    Sigurd the Stout, slain at Clontarf, 1014; m. (1) unknown, (2)
    daughter of Malcolm II., King of Scots.

    Richard III., Earl of Normandy, d. 1028. Robert le Diable, d. 1035.
    William, the Conqueror of England, d. 1087.

    (1) Hundi, d. before 1014.
    Sumarlidi, Earl of Orkney, d. circa 1015. Brúsi, Earl of Orkney, d.
       1031.
    Einar, Earl of Orkney, d. 1026.
    (2) Thorfinn, Earl of Orkney, d. 1064; m. Ingibiorg, daughter of
       Earl Finn Arnason.

    Rögnvald, Earl of Orkney, d. 1046.

    THORFINN, EARL, m. Ingibiorg Arnason.

    Paul, Earl of Orkney, d. 1098; m. daughter of Hakon Ivarsson.
    Erlend, Earl of Orkney, d. 1098; m. Thora, daughter of Sumarlidi
       Ospakson.

    Hakon, Earl of Orkney, d. circa 1122.      Thora.
    Herbiörg.
    Ragnhild.

    Erling, slain in Ireland.
    Gunhild, m. Kol, Kali’s son.
    Magnus, Earl of Orkney, slain 1115, canonised 1135.
    Cecelia, m. Isak.

    Ingibiorg Ragna, m. Sigurd of Westness.    Sigrid.

    Herborg, m. Kolbein Hruga.
    Bjarni, Bishop of Orkney.

    Rögnvald (Kali Kolson), Earl of Orkney, d. 1158, canonised 1192.
    Ingirid, m. Jon Pétrsson.

    Harald Slettmali, d. circa 1127.
    Ingibiorg, m. Olaf, King of the Sudreyar.
    Margaret, m. (1) Maddad, Earl of Athole; (2) Erlend Ungi
    Paul, Earl of Orkney, carried off to Athole by Swein Asleifson.

    Ingigerd, m. Eirik Slagbrellir.
    Harald Ungi, Earl of Orkney, d. circa 1198.
    Magnus Mangi, d. 1184.
    Rögnvald.
    Ingibiorg.
    Elin.
    Ragnhild, m. (1) Lifolf Skalli, (2) Gunni Andreson.
    Snaekoll Gunnison.

    Harald Maddadson, made Earl of Orkney 1139; d. 1206; m.
    (1) Afreka, sister of Duncan, Earl of Fife; (2) Gormlath, daughter
       of
    Malcolm MacHeth.

    Gudröd, King of Man.
    Rögnvald Gudrodson, d. 1229.

    Ragnhild, m. Sumarlid of Argyle and the Isles.
    Reginald, Dugald, Angus.

    (2.) Henry, Earl of Ross.
    Hakon.
    Helena.
    Margaret.
    (1.) Thorfinn, d. in Roxburgh Castle 1201.
    David, Earl of Orkney, d. 1214.
    John, Earl of Orkney, d. 1231, leaving no male issue.
    Gunhild.
    Herborg.
    Langlif.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


               II. THE ANGUS LINE OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.


    GILBRIDE, Earl of Angus, married a sister or daughter of John, Earl
       of Orkney, son of Harald Maddadson.
                              |
            +——––––––—————-+————––––––––––––———-+
           |                                   |
       Magnus II., Earl of Orkney        Gilbride I., Earl of
      and Caithness, d. 1239.         Orkney and Caithness.
                                               |
                                      Gilbride II., Earl of Orkney
                                        and Caithness, d. 1256.
                                               |
                                     +———————–+——————–––————+
                                     |                      |
                        Magnus III., Earl of Orkney       Matilda.
                         and Caithness, d. 1275.
                                    |
                        +——––––——–—-+—––––––––———————+
                        |                            |
      Magnus IV., Earl of Orkney        John, Earl of Orkney
       and Caithness, d. 1284.    and Caithness, d. circa 1310.
                                                |
                                   Magnus V., Earl of Orkney and
                                   Caithness, m. Katharina, d.
                                           circa 1320.
                                                    |
                          +——————————––––––––––––——-+——–––––––———+
                          |                                      |
          Margaret, m. Simon Fraser,        Isabella (?) m. Malise,
        who fell at Halidon Hill, 1333.    Earl of Stratherne, who fell
                                                at Halidon Hill, 1333.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


            III. THE STRATHERNE LINE OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.


      MALISE, Earl of Stratherne, m. Isabella (?),
          daughter of Magnus, Earl of Orkney.
                             |
                 +—————————–––––––––––––——––––—————+
                 |                                 |
    Isabella (?) m. to Sir          Malise, Earl of Stratherne,
    William St. Clair of Roslin.      Caithness, and Orkney, m.
                                      (1) Johanna, daughter of Sir
                                      John Menteith; (2)  Marjory,
                                      daughter of Hugh, Earl of
                                        Ross; d. circa 1350.
                                                    |
             +———–––––––––+—––———–––––———+———–––––——+——–––––-+—————-+
             |            |              |                |         |
     Matilda, m. to       | Agnetta, m. to Arngils or     |  Elisabeth,
        m. to
    Wayland (?), de Ard.  |   Erngisl Suneson, who was    |   Henry St.
       Clair,
             |            |   made Earl of Orkney 1353.   |    Earl of
       Orkney.
             |            |                               |
             |  Isabella, m. to William,    (?) m. to Guttorm Sperra.
             |    Earl of Ross, in 1334.                  |
             |                               Malise Sperra, slain at
       Scalloway
      Alexander de Ard.                        by Earl Henry St. Clair,
       1389.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


             IV. THE ST. CLAIR LINE OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.


                      WILLIAM ST. CLAIR of Roslin _m._ Isabella (?),
                         daughter of Malise, Earl of Stratherne.
              _______________________________|____________
              |                                           |
            David.                 Henry, made Earl of Orkney 1379; _m._
               (1)
                                        Elisabeth, daughter of Malise
                                           (the younger),
                                        Earl of Stratherne, Caithness,
                                           and Orkney;
                                        (2) Janet, daughter of Walter
                                           Haliburton
                                        of Dirleton; and _d. circa_
                                           1400.
              _________________________________________________|____________________
              |                 |                   |
                                               |
    Margaret, m. to           | Henry, Earl of Orkney, _m._ Egidia
       Douglas,      John.
    James of Cragy.           | daughter of Lord William Douglas; _d._
                                   |    _circa_ 1418.       |
                                   |                |
                      Elisabeth, _m._ to            |
                      John de Drummond.           |
                                                        |
                                     William, Earl of Orkney, exchanged
                                        his
                                       rights to the Earldom of Orkney
                                          for the
                                       lands of Ravenscraig, 1471.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: HJALTLAND.]


------------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: ORKNEYAR.]


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            ORKNEYINGA SAGA.

                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.

                             OF THE EARLS.


It is said that the Orkney Islands were colonised in the days of Harald
the Fairhaired,[223] but previously they were a station for
Vikings.[224]

The first Earl of the Orkneys was called Sigurd. He was the son of
Eystein Glumra (the loud-talking), and brother of Rögnvald, Earl of
Moeri.[225]

After Sigurd his son Guttorm ruled one year.

Torf-Einar,[226] son of Earl Rögnvald, succeeded him. He was a man of
great power, and was Earl a long time. Hálfdán Hálegg[227] (high-legs)
made an expedition against Torf-Einar, and drove him from the Orkneys.
Einar returned, and slew Hálfdán in Rinansey.[228] Thereupon King Harald
brought an army over to the Orkneys. Then Einar fled to Scotland. King
Harald made the Orkneymen swear oaths of fealty to him for themselves
and all their possessions. The Earl and King Harald were afterwards
reconciled. He became the King’s man, and held the land as a fief from
him. He had, however, no tribute to pay, as there was much predatory
warfare then in the islands; but he paid the king sixty marks of
gold[229] (once for all). After this, King Harald made a raid on
Scotland, as is told in the Glumdrapa.[230]

After Torf-Einar, Arnkell, Erlend, and Thorfinn Hausakliuf
(skull-splitter), his sons, succeeded him. In their days Eirik
Blódöx[231] (bloody axe) came over from Norway, and the Earls were his
vassals. Arnkell and Erlend fell in battle,[232] but Thorfinn governed
the land and became an old man. His sons were Arnfid, Hávard, Lödver,
Ljót, and Skúli; their mother was Grélaug, daughter of Earl Dungad
(Duncan) in Caithness.[233] Her mother was Gróa, daughter of Thorstein
the Red.

In the days of Earl Thorfinn the sons of Eirik Blódöx arrived from
Norway, when they had fled from Earl Hákon, and they did many deeds of
violence in the islands. Earl Thorfinn died on a sickbed, and his sons,
of whom there are extensive histories, succeeded him. Lödver survived
his brothers, and ruled the land alone. His son was Earl Sigurd the
Stout; he was a powerful man, and a great warrior.

In his days Olaf, Tryggvi’s son, returning from a viking expedition to
the west, came to the Orkneys with his men, and seized Earl Sigurd in
Rörvág,[234] as he lay there with a single ship. King Olaf offered the
Earl to ransom his life on condition that he should embrace the true
faith and be baptized; that he should become his man, and proclaim
Christianity over all the Orkneys. He took his son Hundi or Hvelp
(whelp) as a hostage, and left the Orkneys for Norway, where he became
King; and Hundi stayed with him some years, and died there.

After that Earl Sigurd paid no allegiance to King Olaf. He married the
daughter of Malcolm, King of Scots,[235] and their son was Earl
Thorfinn; his elder sons [by a former marriage] were Sumarlidi, Brúsi,
and Einar.

Five years after the death of King Olaf, Tryggvi’s son,[236] Earl Sigurd
went to Ireland. He set his elder sons over his domains, and sent
Thorfinn to the King of Scots, his mother’s father. While on this
expedition Sigurd was killed in Brian’s battle;[237] and as soon as the
news came to the Orkneys his sons Sumarlidi, Brúsi, and Einar, were
accepted as Earls, and they divided the islands among them, each taking
one third.

Thorfinn was five winters old when their father fell. When the King of
Scots heard of the Earl’s death he bestowed Caithness and Sutherland
upon his grandson, with the title of Earl, and gave him men to rule the
domain along with him. Earl Thorfinn was very precocious in the maturity
of all his powers. He was of large stature and strong, but ungainly. As
he grew up it soon became apparent that he was avaricious, harsh, and
cruel, yet a very clever man.

The brothers Einar and Brúsi were different in their dispositions. Brúsi
was clever and fond of company, eloquent and beloved. Einar was stubborn
and taciturn, disagreeable and avaricious, yet a great warrior.
Sumarlidi was like Brúsi in his disposition. He was the eldest, and the
most short-lived of the brothers. He died on a sickbed.

After his death Thorfinn demanded his share of [Sumarlidi’s portion of]
the Orkneys, although he already had Caithness and Sutherland which had
belonged to his father Sigurd. This Einar considered to be much more
than a third of the Orkneys, and he would not give up any part of them
to Thorfinn. Brúsi, however, consented to give up his share [of the
portion belonging to Sumarlidi], saying that he did not covet more of
the land than his own proper third. Then Einar took possession of two
shares of the islands. He became then a powerful man, and had a large
number of retainers. In the summer he made war expeditions, calling out
great levies of his men from their homes; but these expeditions were not
always successful, and the Bœndr[238] began to grow tired of them, but
the Earl exacted all his services with violence, and did not suffer any
one to speak against them. He was indeed a man of the greatest violence.
Then there arose great scarcity in the islands on account of the labour
and large expense to which the Bœndr were thus subjected. However, in
the parts belonging to Brúsi there were good seasons and easy life, and
he was greatly liked by the Bœndr.




                               CHAPTER II

                         OF AMUNDI AND THORKEL.


THERE was a powerful and wealthy man, by name Amundi, who lived in
Hrossey,[239] at Sandvik on Laufandaness. He had a son, by name Thorkel,
who was the most accomplished man in all the Orkneys.

One spring the Earl called out the Bœndr as usual, but they murmured
greatly, and brought their grievances before Amundi, and asked him to
say a good word for them to the Earl. He replied that the Earl was not
disposed to listen to advice, and it would be of no avail to ask him to
do this, as he and the Earl were such good friends; he further said
that, from what he knew of his own temper and that of the Earl, there
was great danger that they might become enemies, and he would have
nothing to do with the matter. Then they asked Thorkel, and he was very
reluctant, although at last he yielded to their solicitations, but
Amundi thought he had been too rash to promise.

When the Earl held a meeting (Thing)[240] Thorkel spoke on behalf of the
Bœndr. He begged the Earl to spare the people, and told him of their
distress. The Earl answered blandly, and said he would give great weight
to Thorkel’s words. “I had intended,” he said, “to take out six ships,
but now I shall not take more than three; but thou, Thorkel, do not ask
this of me a second time.”

The Bœndr were very grateful to Thorkel for his assistance, and the Earl
made an expedition during the summer, and again in the autumn.

Next spring the Earl again called out his men, and held a meeting with
the Bœndr. Thorkel spoke again on their behalf, and begged the Earl to
spare them. The Earl became wroth, and said that for his speech the lot
of the Bœndr should be far worse than before. Then he became so mad with
rage, that he said that one or other of them should not leave the
meeting unhurt, and immediately dissolved the meeting.

When Amundi heard what Thorkel and the Earl had said to each other, he
bade his son go abroad, and Thorkel went to Earl Thorfinn in Caithness.
He stayed there a long time, and became foster-father to the Earl, who
was still young. From that time he was called Thorkel Fóstri, and became
a man of great repute. Other men of note and influence fled from the
Orkneys on account of Earl Einar’s violence; some to Earl Thorfinn, some
to Norway, and some to other countries.

When Earl Thorfinn came to man’s estate, he sent to his brother Einar,
and demanded from him what he considered his share of the Orkneys. Einar
was not inclined to divide his possessions: so, when Earl Thorfinn heard
this, he called out men from Caithness, and set out for the Orkneys.
When Earl Einar had news of this, he collected an army, with the intent
to defend his possessions. Earl Brúsi also collected an army, and went
to meet them, and tried to reconcile them; and peace was made on
condition that Thorfinn should have one-third of the Orkneys as his own
proper share.

Then Brúsi and Einar joined their portions, on the footing that the
latter should rule them and defend them for both, and that he who
survived the other should inherit his portion. But this compact was
thought unfair, as Brúsi had a son, by name Rögnvald, and Einar had no
son. Thorfinn appointed his own deputies to manage his possessions in
the islands, but he himself lived for the most part in Caithness.

In the summer Einar went on expeditions to Ireland, Scotland, and
Bretland (Wales). One summer, when ravaging Ireland, he fought in
Ulfreksfiord[241] with Konufögr,[242] an Irish king, and was defeated,
with a heavy loss of men. The next summer Eyvind Urarhorn[243] (bull’s
horn) came from Ireland on his way to Norway, and being overtaken by a
violent gale, he turned his ships into Asmundarvag,[244] and lay there
for a while. When Earl Einar heard this, he went thither with many men,
seized Eyvind, and caused him to be killed, but gave quarter to most of
his followers. They went to Norway in the autumn, and when they met King
Olaf,[245] they told him of Eyvind’s murder. He said little about it,
but it was afterwards found that he considered this a great loss and a
serious offence against himself, though he never said much about things
with which he was displeased.

Earl Thorfinn sent Thorkel Fóstri to collect his revenues, but Earl
Einar regarded it as chiefly owing to Thorkel that Earl Thorfinn had
come into [his possessions in] the Islands. Thorkel left the islands
suddenly, and went to Ness (Caithness). He told Earl Thorfinn that he
had become aware that Earl Einar had intended to kill him, if his
relatives and friends had not given him warning. “And now,” he added, “I
will avoid the risk of having such a meeting with the Earl as shall
bring matters to a crisis between us, and I will go farther away, where
his power does not reach me.”

Thorfinn persuaded him to go to King Olaf, in Norway, and spend the
winter with him in great friendship; “for you will,” he said, “be highly
esteemed wherever you come among noble men; but I know your temper and
that of the Earl to be such that you will not long refrain from
hostilities.”

Thorkel then prepared for his departure, and in the autumn he went to
Norway to visit King Olaf, and spent the winter with him in great
friendship. The King often sought Thorkel’s advice, because he
considered him a wise man and a weighty counsellor, and such was the
truth. In telling of the Earls, the King found that he was very partial,
a great friend of Thorfinn, and an enemy of Earl Einar. Early in the
spring the King sent a ship with a message to Earl Thorfinn, asking him
to come and see him; and the Earl did not put off the journey, for
protestations of friendship had accompanied the message.




                              CHAPTER III

                       THORKEL SLAYS EARL EINAR.


THORFINN went east to King Olaf in Norway, where he was well received,
and spent the summer there; and when he prepared to go westward again,
King Olaf gave him a large and excellent war-ship, fully equipped.
Thorkel Fóstri went with the Earl, who gave him the ship in which he had
come from the west in the summer. The King and the Earl parted great
friends.

In the autumn Earl Thorfinn came to the Orkneys. When Earl Einar heard
of it, he stayed with many men in his ships. Brúsi went to meet the two
brothers, and tried to reconcile them; and once more they made peace and
confirmed it with oaths. Thorkel Fóstri should be pardoned, and be a
friend of Earl Einar, and each of them should give the other a banquet,
and the Earl should first come to Thorkel at Sandvik.[246]

When Einar came, he and his men were most sumptuously treated, yet the
Earl was not cheerful. The banqueting hall was a large one, with doors
at each end. When the Earl was going away, Thorkel was to accompany him,
and he sent men to examine the way by which they were to go. When they
returned, they said they had discovered three divisions of armed men in
ambush, and were certain that foul play was intended. Upon hearing this,
Thorkel delayed starting, and called his men together. The Earl asked
him to make himself ready, and said it was now time to go. Thorkel
replied that he had many things to see to, and kept going out and in.

There were fires on the floor, and Thorkel walked about, and once when
he entered by one of the doors he was followed by an Icelander, by name
Hallvard, from the east of Iceland, who shut the door after him. As
Thorkel passed between the fire and where the Earl sat, the latter said:
“Are you ready now?”

Thorkel replied: “I am ready now,” and struck the Earl a blow on the
head, so that he fell forward on the floor.

Hallvard said: “I never saw people with so little presence of mind as
you who are here. Why do you not take the Earl out of the fire?”

With his axe he again struck the Earl on the back of the head, and
pulled him towards the bench. Then Thorkel and his men walked out
quickly by the door opposite to that by which he had entered, and there,
outside the door, were the rest of his men fully armed.

The Earl’s men took hold of their master and found that he was dead.
They were too much stupified to take revenge, as the thing was done so
suddenly, and no one expected such a deed from Thorkel; besides, the
Earl’s men were mostly without arms, and many of them were good friends
of Thorkel’s before. Thus Thorkel had to thank his good fortune that he
enjoyed a longer life.

The Earl’s men went away, and Thorkel to his ship. In a few days,
shortly after the beginning of the winter, he left for the east, and
arrived safely in Norway. He went immediately to see King Olaf, who
received him very graciously, and felt much pleasure at his deed; and
with him Thorkel spent the winter.




                               CHAPTER IV

                             OF EARL BRÚSI.


AFTER the death of Earl Einar, Earl Brúsi took possession of that
portion of the domain which had belonged to his brother (Einar), for
there had been many witnesses to the compact which they had made.
Thorfinn thought it right that they should each have one-half of the
Islands, yet Brúsi had two-thirds that year. Next year Thorfinn demanded
one-half, to which Brúsi did not consent, and they had many meetings
about it. Their friends tried to settle matters between them, but
Thorfinn would not take anything less than half of the Islands.

Brúsi said: “I was satisfied with that third part which I inherited from
my father, and no one claimed it from me, and I have inherited a second
third after my brother according to a lawful agreement; and although I
am unable to contend with you, brother, I will have recourse to other
means than giving up my lands and title at present.”

Thus the meeting ended. But Brúsi saw that he had no strength to hold
his own against Thorfinn, because he had much larger possessions, and,
besides, some hope of assistance from his grandfather, the King of
Scots. He therefore resolved to go to Olaf, King of Norway, taking with
him his son Rögnvald, who was then ten years old. The King received him
well, and he told him his business and explained to him how matters
stood between him and his brother, and begged his assistance to keep his
possessions, offering in return his full friendship.

The King replied by stating that Harald the Fairhaired had reserved to
himself all odal rights[247] in the Orkneys, and that the Earls since
that time always held those lands as fiefs, and never as their own.

“It is a proof of this,” he said, “that when Eirik Blódöx and his sons
were in the Orkneys, the Earls were their vassals; and when Olaf,
Tryggvi’s son, my kinsman, came there, your father, Earl Sigurd, became
his man. Now, I have succeeded to the entire heritage of Olaf, Tryggvi’s
son. I will give you the islands as a fief, on condition that you become
my man, and then I will try whether my help will not be of more avail to
you than the aid and assistance of the King of Scots to your brother
Thorfinn. But if you will not accept these terms, I will try to recover
the possessions and dominion which my kinsmen have inherited and
possessed there in the west.”

The Earl considered these words thoughtfully, and sought the advice of
his friends as to whether he should consent to King Olaf’s terms and
become his man. “I do not see,” he said, “how matters will go with me at
our parting if I refuse, because the King has made an unequivocal claim,
and regards the Islands as his property. Now, considering his great
power, and the circumstance that we are here, he will have no scruples
in making my case such as he likes.”

Thus, although the Earl had objections to both alternatives, he resolved
to give up all, himself and his dominions, into the King’s power. Then
King Olaf asserted his suzerainty over all his hereditary possessions,
and the Earl became his man, and confirmed this compact with oaths.

Earl Thorfinn heard that his brother Brúsi had gone east to King Olaf to
solicit his assistance; but as he had himself seen the King before, and
secured his friendship, he thought that his case had been well prepared
there, and he knew that many would advocate his cause. Nevertheless, he
resolved to prepare to go to Norway as quickly as possible, intending
that he should arrive there very nearly at the same time with his
brother, so that he might see the King himself before his brother had
concluded his business. This, however, turned out otherwise than the
Earl intended, for he did not see King Olaf until the treaty between
Earl Brúsi and the King was fully concluded; and he did not know that
Earl Brúsi had given up his dominions until he came to the King.

At their first interview the King made the same claim to the dominion of
the Orkneys which he had made before to Earl Brúsi; and he made the same
request of Thorfinn—namely, that he should acknowledge the King’s
suzerainty over his portion of the islands.

The Earl gave a courteous answer to this demand, saying: “I consider
your friendship of great importance; and if you think you require my
assistance against other chiefs, you have well deserved it; but I cannot
well pay you homage, as I am already an Earl of the King of Scots, and
his vassal.”

But when the King found from these words that the Earl wished to avoid
the claims which he had put forward, he said: “If you will not become my
man, there is the other alternative—viz., that I place that man over the
Islands whom I choose. But I wish you to promise me with oaths not to
claim those lands, and to leave him in peace whom I place over them.
Now, if you will not accept any of those conditions, he who governs the
land will say that hostilities may be expected from you, and in that
case you must not think it strange if a dale meets a hill.”[248]

The Earl answered by requesting time to consider these matters. The King
gave him time, and permission to consult with his friends; but then the
Earl asked the King for a further delay to the next summer, so that he
might go home; “for,” said he, “my counsellors are at home, and my
judgment is not yet mature on account of my age.” The King told him to
make his choice.

Thorkel Fóstri was with the King at the time, and he sent a message to
the Earl secretly, telling him that whatever else his intentions were he
should not think of parting with the King without being reconciled to
him for the present, as he had got him in his power. Now the Earl
thought there was no alternative but to let the King have his will,
although he did not consider it by any means a desirable thing to
relinquish all hope of his patrimony, and to promise with oaths to leave
those in undisturbed possession of his dominions who had no hereditary
right to them. But because he was not certain about his departure (if he
refused), he chose to submit to the King, and to become his man, as
Brúsi his brother had previously done.

The King perceived that Thorfinn was a man of much stronger will than
Brúsi, and distrusted him therefore more. He saw that Thorfinn would
think himself sufficiently powerful, with the aid of the King of Scots,
though he broke this treaty; and the King was sagacious enough to
perceive that, while Brúsi agreed to everything sincerely, and made only
such promises as he intended to keep, Thorfinn agreed cheerfully to
everything, while at the same time he had resolved within himself what
course he would take; and though he made no objections to anything which
the King proposed, yet the King suspected that he intended to act upon
their agreements afterwards in his own way.




                               CHAPTER V

                    OF THE EARLS BRÚSI AND THORFINN.


WHEN King Olaf had considered all these matters, he had a general
meeting summoned by the blowing of a trumpet, to which the Earls were
also called.

The King said: “I will now make publicly known the treaty between me and
the Earls of the Orkneys. They have acknowledged my suzerainty over all
the Orkneys and Hjaltland (Shetland), promising to become my men, and
confirming these their promises with oaths. In return, I will give to
Brúsi one-third of the land, and to Thorfinn another third, which they
had before; but the last third, which belonged to Earl Einar, I adjudge
to be forfeited to me, because he slew Eyvind Urarhorn, my henchman[249]
and beloved comrade. Of this portion I will dispose as I shall think
fit; and I make it a condition with you, my Earls, that you be
reconciled to Thorkel Amundi’s son concerning your brother Einar’s
slaying, and I wish to act as an arbitrator between you if you agree to
this.”

The Earls consented to this, as to everything else which the King
proposed. Then Thorkel stepped forward and submitted his case to the
King’s decision, after which the meeting was dissolved. King Olaf
awarded a weregild[250] for Earl Einar as for three Lendermen;
one-third, however, should be remitted in consideration of the Earl’s
guilt.

Earl Thorfinn asked permission to depart, and when he had obtained it,
he made himself ready in great haste. One day, when all was ready, and
the Earl was drinking on board his ship, Thorkel, Amundi’s son, came and
laid his head on the Earl’s knees, and asked him to do with it what he
liked.

The Earl said: “Why do you do this? We are reconciled according to the
King’s arbitration; arise.”

He rose and said: “I will abide by the King’s arbitration concerning
differences between me and Brúsi; but, as far as you are concerned, I
leave everything to you. Although the King has reserved for me
possessions and safety in the Orkneys, I am so well acquainted with your
disposition that I know it would be impossible for me to go there unless
I have your confidence; and I will promise you never to go to the
Orkneys, whatever the King says.”

The Earl replied slowly, and said: “Would you rather have me to adjust
our affairs than abide by the King’s decision? If so, I make it the
first condition that you shall go with me to the Orkneys, and remain
with me, and not leave me except with my permission; that you shall be
in duty bound to defend my land, and to do everything I wish to have
done while we are both alive.”

Thorkel replied: “I leave this to you, like everything else that
concerns me.” Thereupon he submitted his case to the Earl’s decision.

The Earl said he would fix the money payment [for his brother’s death]
afterwards, and received oaths from Thorkel according to their
agreement; and Thorkel prepared to go with him. The Earl left as soon as
he was ready, and he and King Olaf never met afterwards.

Earl Brúsi remained behind, and prepared for his departure more
leisurely. Before he left, King Olaf had an interview with him, and
said: “I think it advisable to make you my confidential agent in the
western parts. I intend to give you two-thirds of the islands, which you
had before, because I do not wish you to have less power, now that you
are my man, than you had before; and as a pledge of my good faith, I
will keep your son Rögnvald with me. I see that with two-thirds of the
land and my assistance you may well hold your own against Earl
Thorfinn.”

Brúsi was thankful for two-thirds of the land. He stayed a little while
yet before he left, and came west to the Islands (the Orkneys) in the
autumn. His son Rögnvald remained with King Olaf. These facts are
mentioned by Ottar Svarti (the swarthy):

                 Readily these noble people
                 Will obey thee as thy subjects.
                 Use your power with moderation;
                 Hjaltlanders! your fame is well known.
                 Till we had thee, fierce in battle,
                 To these eastern shores, there was not
                 Any prince on earth who conquered
                 Those far distant western islands.

When the brothers Thorfinn and Brúsi came west to the Islands, Brúsi
took possession of two-thirds of the domain, and Thorfinn of one, but he
was all the time in Caithness, in Scotland, and placed deputies over the
islands. Brúsi alone had to defend them, for they were in those times
very much exposed to the ravages of Norwegians and Danes, who called
there on their viking expeditions to the west, and plundered in the
outlying parts. Brúsi made complaints to his brother Thorfinn on account
of his not contributing anything to the defence of the Orkneys or
Hjaltland (Shetland), although he received his full share of all the
land-dues and revenues. Then Thorfinn proposed to Brúsi to take
two-thirds of the Islands, undertaking the defence of the whole, and
leave Brúsi one-third. Although this division did not take place
immediately, yet it is said in the History of the Earls that it did take
place, and that Thorfinn had two-thirds of the Islands, and Brúsi
one-third, when Canute the Great conquered Norway, after the flight of
King Olaf.

King Olaf, Harald’s son, received no homage from Earl Thorfinn after he
made the treaty with him and Brúsi.

Earl Thorfinn now became a powerful chief. He was a man of very large
stature, uncomely, sharp-featured, dark-haired, and sallow and swarthy
in his complexion. Yet he was a most martial-looking man, and of great
energy; greedy of wealth and of renown; bold and successful in war, and
a great strategist. He was five years old when he received the title of
Earl and the revenues of Caithness from King Malcolm,[251] his
grandfather, and fourteen when he went forth from his own territory on
maritime expeditions, and attacked the possessions of other chiefs. So
says Arnór Jarlaskáld (the Earls’ poet):

                 By the prince in storm of helmets
                 Was the sword’s edge deeply crimsoned.
                 Scarcely fifteen, the great-hearted
                 Sought renown on fields of battle,
                 Ready to defend his own land,
                 Or to ravage in another’s.
                 Under heaven a braver leader
                 Ne’er was found than Einar’s brother.

Earl Thorfinn was greatly supported by the King of Scots. This
assistance being so near, it much increased his power in the Orkneys.

The King of Scots died after the reconciliation of the brothers. Karl
Hundason[252] took the kingdom in Scotland. He considered Caithness to
belong to him, as to the former kings, and demanded tribute from it as
from other places. Thorfinn, however, did not think his inheritance from
his mother’s father large, though he had Caithness; and besides,
according to his own opinion, it had been given to him first; he was
therefore unwilling to pay any tribute. Thus they became open enemies,
and made war on each other. King Karl wished to appoint a chief, by name
Moddan, over Caithness; he was his sister’s son, and he gave him the
title of Earl. Then Moddan went down from Scotland and collected forces
in Sutherland.

When Earl Thorfinn heard of this, he gathered together an army in
Caithness. Thorkel Fóstri also came to Earl Thorfinn from the Orkneys
with many men, and their united forces were somewhat more numerous than
those of the Scots. When the Scots knew this they hesitated in their
invasion, and returned to Scotland. Earl Thorfinn subdued Sutherland and
Ross, and plundered far and wide in Scotland, and returned again to
Caithness, and Thorkel went back to the Islands; their men also returned
home. Earl Thorfinn stayed at Dungalsbæ, in Caithness, where he had five
war-ships and followers numerous enough to man them.

Moddan came to find King Karl (at Beruvik)[253] and informed him of his
unsuccessful expedition. The King became very angry at his land being
plundered, and started immediately with eleven war-ships and a numerous
army. He sailed northward along Scotland, after having despatched Moddan
to Caithness a second time with many troops. Moddan went by land, and it
was intended that he should make the attack from that side, so that Earl
Thorfinn might be placed between the two armies.

Now, it is to be told of King Karl that he did not stop until he arrived
at Caithness, and he and Earl Thorfinn were not far from each other.
Thorfinn went on board his ships, and sailed out on the Pentland Firth,
intending to go to the Orkneys; and so near were they that King Karl saw
their sails as he sailed into the Firth from the east, and immediately
sailed after them. Earl Thorfinn directed his course to the east of the
Orkneys, intending to go to Sandvik.[254] He moored his ships on the
east side of Dyrness, and immediately sent word to Thorkel to collect
troops.

Earl Thorfinn arrived at Dyrness late in the evening; but as soon as it
was daylight next morning, King Karl came upon them unawares with eleven
war-ships. There were only two alternatives—one to run on shore, and
leave the ships with all their valuable contents to the enemy; the other
was to meet the King, and let fate decide between them. Earl Thorfinn
exhorted his men, and ordered them to have their arms ready. He said he
would not flee, and told them to row briskly towards the enemy. Then
both parties fastened their ships together. Earl Thorfinn addressed his
men, advising them to be smart and to make the first attack fiercely,
and saying that few of the Scotsmen would be able to make a stand. The
fighting was long and fierce. Arnór Jarlaskáld says:

                Once, off Dyrness, to the eastward,
                Came King Kali in a mail-coat
                Famous for its strength and brightness;
                But the land was not defenceless,
                For, with five ships, nothing daunted,
                Scorning flight in warlike temper,
                Valiantly the Prince went forward
                ’Gainst the King’s eleven vessels.

                Then the ships were lashed together—
                Know ye how the men were falling?
                All their swords and boards were swimming
                In the life-blood of the Scotsmen;
                Hearts were sinking—bowstrings screaming,
                Darts were flying—spear-shafts bending;
                Swords were biting, blood flowed freely,
                And the Prince’s heart was merry.

Now Earl Thorfinn incited his men to the utmost, and a fierce conflict
ensued. The Scots in the King’s ships made but a feeble resistance
before the mast, whereupon Thorfinn jumped from the quarter-deck, and
ran to the foredeck, and fought fiercely. When he saw the crowd in the
King’s ships getting thinner, he urged his men to board them. King Karl,
perceiving this, gave orders to his men to cut the ropes, and get the
ships away instantly; to take to their oars, and bear away. At the same
time Thorfinn and his men fastened grappling-hooks in the King’s ship.
He called for his banner to be borne before him, and a great number of
his men followed it. King Karl jumped from his ship into another vessel,
with those of his men who still held out; but the most part had fallen
already. He then ordered them to take to their oars; and the Scots took
to flight—Thorfinn pursuing them. Thus says Arnór:

                 Never was a battle shorter;
                 Soon with spears it was decided.
                 Though my lord had fewer numbers,
                 Yet he chased them all before him;
                 Hoarsely croaked the battle-gull, when
                 Thickly fell the wounded king’s-men;
                 South of Sandwick swords were reddened.

King Karl fled all the way south to Breidafiord,[255] where he went on
shore, and collected an army anew. Earl Thorfinn went back after the
battle, when Thorkel Fóstri came to him with a numerous army. They then
sailed south to Breidafiord in pursuit of King Karl, and when they came
to Scotland they began to plunder. Then they were told that Earl Moddan
was at Thurso, in Caithness, with a large army. He had sent to Ireland
for men, because he had there many relatives and friends, and he was
waiting for these troops. Then it was thought advisable that Thorkel
should go to Caithness with a portion of the army; but Thorfinn remained
in Scotland, and plundered there. Thorkel went secretly, because all the
inhabitants of Caithness were true and faithful to him; and no news went
of his journey till he came to Thurso by night, and surprised Earl
Moddan in a house, which they set on fire. Moddan was asleep in an upper
storey, and jumped out; but as he jumped down from the stair, Thorkel
hewed at him with a sword, and it hit him on the neck, and took off his
head.

After this his men surrendered, but some escaped by flight. Many were
slain, but some received quarter.

Thorkel did not stay there long, but went to Breidafiord, bringing with
him all the men he had been able to collect in Caithness, Sutherland,
and Ross. He met Earl Thorfinn in Moray, and told him what he had done
in his expedition, for which he received hearty thanks from the Earl,
and there they both stayed for a while.




                               CHAPTER VI

                           OF THE ORKNEYMEN.


NOW it is to be told of King Karl that he went to Scotland after the
battle with Earl Thorfinn, and collected an army as well from the south
as the west and east of Scotland, and all the way south from Satiri
(Kintyre); the forces for which Earl Moddan had sent also came to him
from Ireland. He sent far and near to the chieftains for men, and
brought all this army against Earl Thorfinn. They met at Torfnes,[256]
on the south side of Bæfiord. There was a fierce battle, and the Scots
were by far the most numerous. Earl Thorfinn was among the foremost of
his men; he had a gold-plated helmet on his head, a sword at his belt,
and a spear in his hand, and he cut and thrust with both hands. It is
even said that he was foremost of all his men. He first attacked the
Irish division, and so fierce were he and his men, that the Irish were
immediately routed, and never regained their position. Then King Karl
had his standard brought forward against Earl Thorfinn, and there was
the fiercest struggle for a while; but it ended in the flight of the
King; and some say he was slain. Thus Arnór Jarlaskáld:

                  Reddened were the wolf’s-bit’s edges
                  At a place—men call it Torfness;—
                  It was by a youthful ruler
                  This was done, upon a Monday.
                  Pliant swords were loudly ringing
                  At this War-Thing, south of Ekkial,
                  When the prince had joined in battle
                  Bravely with the King of Scotland.

                  High his helm the Lord of Hjaltland
                  Bore amid the clang of weapons;
                  In the battle ever foremost,
                  Reddened he his gleaming spear-point
                  In the wounds it gave the Irish.
                  Thus my lord his mighty prowess
                  Showed beneath his British buckler—
                  Taking many warriors captive;
                  Hlödver’s kinsman burnt the country.

Earl Thorfinn drove the fugitives before him through Scotland, and
subdued the country wherever he went, and all the way south to Fife.
Then he sent Thorkel Fóstri away with some of his men. When the Scots
heard that the Earl had sent away some of his men, those that had
submitted to him meant to attack him. As soon, however, as he was aware
of their treachery, he called his men together and went to meet them;
but when they knew he was prepared, they hesitated to make the attack.
Earl Thorfinn resolved to give battle to the Scots as soon as he met
them; but they had not the manliness to defend themselves, and ran away
into woods and deserted places; and when he had pursued the fugitives,
he called his men together, and said he would burn the whole district,
and thus pay the Scots for their treachery. Then the Earl’s men went
over hamlets and farms, and burnt everything, so that scarcely a hut was
left standing. Those of the men whom they found they killed, but the
women and old people dragged themselves into woods and deserted places,
with wailings and lamentations. Some of them they drove before them, and
many were taken captives. Thus says Arnór Jarlaskáld:

                Fast the flames devoured the homesteads;
                Lives that day were in great peril;
                Fire the Scottish kingdom ravaged—
                All reduced to smoking ashes;
                Great the mischief done that summer
                By the mighty Slaughter-Teacher;
                Three times were the luckless Scotsmen
                By the Prince completely vanquished.

After this Thorfinn went through Scotland to the north, till he reached
his ships, and subdued the country wherever he went, and did not stop
till he came to Caithness, where he spent the winter; but every season
after this he went out on expeditions, and plundered in the summer time
with all his men.




                              CHAPTER VII

                 OF THE FAMOUS DEEDS OF EARL THORFINN.


EARL THORFINN made himself famous in the Orkneys by entertaining his own
men and many other men of note throughout the winter, so that no one had
to go to inns—providing food and drink at his own charges, in the same
manner as chiefs in other countries, Kings, and Earls entertain their
henchmen and guests at Christmas time. About this time Earl Brúsi died,
and Earl Thorfinn took possession of all the islands. But of Rögnvald,
Brúsi’s son, it is said that he was in the battle of Stiklestad[257]
when King Olaf was killed. Rögnvald escaped, with other fugitives, and
carried away King Olaf’s brother, Harald Sigurdson, who was dangerously
wounded, and brought him to a small Bondi to be cured; but he himself
crossed the Kjöl,[258] and went to Jamtaland, and thence to Sweden to
see King Onund. Harald stayed with the Bondi until he had recovered from
his wounds. The Bondi then gave him his son as an attendant, and he went
through Jamtaland to Sweden secretly. At their parting, which took place
in a certain copse, Harald sang:

                Though now thus here and there I’m hunted
                Through the covert—small’s the honour,
                Who knows but that far and wide yet
                Some day shall my name be famous?

Harald met Rögnvald in Sweden, and they went both of them east to
Gardariki (Russia), along with many others who had been with King Olaf.
They did not stop till they came east to King Jarizleif, in
Hólmgard;[259] and he received them most heartily for the sake of King
Olaf the Holy. He took them both, as well as Erling, Rögnvald’s son,
into his service as defenders of his country.




                              CHAPTER VIII

              MAGNUS, OLAF’S SON, ACCEPTED KING OF NORWAY.


RÖGNVALD, Brúsi’s son, remained in Gardariki (Russia) when Harald,
Sigurd’s son, went to Mikligard (Constantinople); he had the defence of
the frontier in summer, and spent the winters in Hólmgard. The King as
well as the people esteemed him highly. Rögnvald was a man of large
stature and great strength, and one of the handsomest men in appearance,
and his accomplishments were such that his equal was hardly to be found.
Arnór Jarlaskáld says that he fought ten battles in Gardar:

                  So it happened that ten battles
                  Fought the soldier fierce in Gardar.

Einar Thambarskelfir and Kálf Arnason brought Magnus, Olaf’s son, from
Gardariki (Russia). Rögnvald met them in Aldeigiuborg.[260] He had
nearly made an attack on Kálf before he had informed him of their
business. Einar said that Kálf repented of (his share in) the great
crime of having deprived King Olaf the Holy of his life and kingdom, and
that he now wished to make amends to his son Magnus. He further told
Rögnvald that Kálf wished to place Magnus on the throne, and support him
against the Vikings in the pay of the Canutes. By this Rögnvald was
softened, and now Einar Thambarskelfir asked him to go with them up to
Hólmgard, and introduce them and their business to King Jarizleif. He
should tell him that the Norwegians were so disgusted with the rule of
the Canutes, but most of all with Alfifa,[261] that they would prefer
any hardships to serving them longer; and then he should ask King
Jarizleif to permit Magnus, Olaf’s son, to become their chief. When they
came there, Rögnvald, Queen Ingigerd,[262] and many of the noblemen,
pleaded their cause. King Jarizleif was unwilling to trust Magnus into
the hands of the Norwegians, because of their treatment of his father.
At last, however, they succeeded so far that twelve of the noblest men
made oaths to the effect that their offers were sincere; but King
Jarizleif trusted Rögnvald so much that he did not require him to swear.
Kálf promised King Magnus with an oath that he would accompany him both
within his kingdom and out of it, and do everything to support his power
and to secure his safety. Thereupon the Norwegians accepted Magnus as
their King, and swore fealty to him.

Einar and Kálf stayed in Hólmgard till after Christmas. Then they went
down to Aldeigiuborg (Ladoga), and procured ships. As soon as the sea
was open in the spring, Rögnvald, Brúsi’s son, made himself ready to go
with King Magnus. They went first to Sweden, then to Jamtaland, crossed
the Kjöl, and came to Veradal. When King Magnus came to Thrándheim, all
the population submitted to him. Then he went down to Nídarós,[263] and
was accepted King of the whole country at the Eyrar-Thing. After this
came the dealings of King Magnus and King Sveinn.




                               CHAPTER IX

          RÖGNVALD ASKS MAGNUS FOR LEAVE TO GO TO THE ISLANDS.


WHEN Rögnvald, Brúsi’s son, came to Norway, he heard of the death of his
father Brúsi, and at the same time, that Earl Thorfinn had taken
possession of the whole of the Islands. Then he wished to visit his odal
possessions, and asked King Magnus to permit him to go. The King saw
that it was necessary for him to go, and willingly gave him permission.
At the same time, he gave him the title of Earl, and three war-ships
well equipped. He also gave him a grant of that third part of the
Orkneys which King Olaf had possessed,[264] and had given to his father
Brúsi. At last King Magnus promised his foster-brother his full
friendship, adding that his assistance should be at his service whenever
he required it. Thus they parted the best of friends.




                               CHAPTER X

                         OF ROGNVALD’S VOYAGE.


EARL RÖGNVALD sailed for the Orkneys, and went first to the estates
which his father had possessed. Thence he sent messengers to his
kinsman, Earl Thorfinn, and asked for that third part (of the Islands)
which had belonged to his father. He also requested them to tell him
that he had obtained from King Magnus a grant of that third which had
belonged to King Olaf. He therefore demanded two-thirds, if it was the
pleasure of his kinsman Thorfinn. At this time Thorfinn had great
quarrels with the Irish and the inhabitants of the Sudreyar (Hebrides),
and felt himself greatly in want of assistance. He therefore gave
Rögnvald’s messengers the following reply:—That Rögnvald should take
possession of that third which rightly belonged to him. “As for the
third which Magnus calls his own,” he said, “we gave that up to King
Olaf the Holy because we were then in his power, but not because we
thought it just. I and my kinsman Rögnvald will agree all the better the
less we talk of that third, which has been long enough a cause of
dispute. But if Rögnvald wishes to be my faithful friend, I consider
those possessions in good hands which he has for his pleasure and for
the good of us both. His assistance will soon be of greater value to me
than the revenues which I derive from them.”

Upon this the messengers returned, and said he had yielded up to
Rögnvald two-thirds on condition that they should be allies, as it was
right they should be, on account of their relationship. Rögnvald said,
however, that he did not demand more than what he considered his own;
but as Thorfinn had so willingly given up the lands, he would indeed
assist him, and be his firm friend, which was but natural, as they were
so nearly related. Accordingly Rögnvald took possession of two-thirds of
the islands.




                               CHAPTER XI

            THE BATTLE OF THE KINSMEN THORFINN AND ROGNVALD.


EARLY in the spring Thorfinn sent word to his kinsman Rögnvald, and
asked him to go out with him on an expedition, bringing as many men as
he could. As soon as Rögnvald received this message, he collected
together as many men and vessels as he could, and when he was ready he
went to meet Earl Thorfinn, who was also ready with his band. He
received his kinsman Rögnvald very well; and they joined their forces.
During the summer they plundered in the Sudreyar (Hebrides), and in
Ireland, and in Scotland’s Fiord;[265] and Thorfinn conquered the land
wherever he went. They had a great battle at a place called
Vatnsfiord.[266] It began early in the morning, and the kinsmen gained
the victory. This is mentioned by Arnór Jarlaskáld:

                 Know ye that place, Vatnsfiord?
                 There was I in greatest danger;
                 Marks are there of my Lord’s doings,
                 He who tries the strength of warriors.
                 Forth the people quickly carried
                 From the ships the shields of many;
                 Then was heard the dismal howling
                 Of the gray wolf o’er the corpses.

After this battle they returned to the Orkneys, and stayed at home
during the winter. Thus eight winters passed that Earl Rögnvald had
two-thirds of the islands without any objection on the part of Earl
Thorfinn. Every summer they went out on war expeditions, sometimes both
together, sometimes separately, as Arnór says:

                   The chief beloved did many deeds.
                   Everywhere there fell before him
                   Irishmen, or British people;
                   Fire devoured the Scottish kingdom.

The kinsmen agreed very well whenever they met; but when bad men went
between them dissensions often arose. Earl Thorfinn dwelt for the most
part in Caithness, at the place called Gaddgedlar,[267] where Scotland
and England (?) meet.




                              CHAPTER XII

                      OF EARL THORFINN’S WARFARE.


ONE summer Earl Thorfinn made war in the Sudreyar (Hebrides) and in
Scotland. He had sent men into England to foray, and they carried away
all the spoil they could find. But when the English became aware of the
presence of the Vikings, they gathered together and attacked them. They
took from them all the cattle, and killed all the men that were of any
note, but sent back some of the reivers, and requested them to tell Earl
Thorfinn how they had made the Vikings tired of plunder and rapine, to
which they added many insulting words. Thereupon the reivers went to
Earl Thorfinn and told him of their mishaps. He was greatly annoyed at
the loss of his men, yet he said he could not then do anything, and that
they would have to refrain at this time; but he said he was quite able
to repay the Englishmen for their mockery, and would do so if he were
well next summer.




                              CHAPTER XIII

               OF EARL THORFINN’S EXPEDITION TO ENGLAND.


AT that time Hardicanute was King of England and Denmark. Earl Thorfinn
went to the Orkneys and spent the winter there. Early in the spring he
called out a levy from all his domains, and sent word to his kinsman
Rögnvald. Rögnvald assented, and called out men from all his
possessions. Earl Thorfinn collected troops in Caithness and the
Orkneys. He also had many from Scotland and Ireland, and from the
Sudreyar (Hebrides), and with all these forces he sailed to England as
he had promised. Hardicanute was in Denmark at the time. As soon as the
Earls came into England they began to harry and plunder; but the chiefs
whose duty it was to defend the land went to meet them with an army.
There was a great and fierce battle, in which the Earls gained the
victory. After this they plundered far and wide in England, slaying men,
and burning the dwellings of the people. This is mentioned by Arnór:

                 Not forgotten was this battle
                 By the English, or men ever.
                 Hither came the rich ring-giver,
                 With his warriors, nearly doubled;
                 Swords cut keenly; under shield-boss
                 Rushed all Rögnvald’s men together;
                 Strong were all the old one’s people.
                 South of Man did these things happen.

                 On the native land of Britons
                 Brought the Earl his banner forward;
                 Reddened then his beak the eagle;
                 Forward pressing hard his warriors,
                 Battle waxed, and men diminished;
                 Fugitives were chased by victors;
                 Blazed the fire, with red rays gleaming
                 Of the wood’s foe, leaping heavenward.

Earl Thorfinn had two pitched battles in England. Besides, he had many
casual encounters, and slew many people. He stayed there throughout the
summer, and went back in autumn to the Orkneys for the winter.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                       KALF FLEES TO THE ORKNEYS.


ABOUT this time Kálf Arnason was banished by King Magnus. He crossed the
seas, and went to Earl Thorfinn, his brother-in-law. Thorfinn’s wife was
then Ingibiorg, the mother of the Earls (Paul and Erlend), and daughter
of Earl Finn Arnason. There was great friendship between Kálf and Earl
Thorfinn. The Earl had a great many of his men about him, which became
very expensive to him. Then there were many who advised him not to leave
two-thirds of the Islands to Rögnvald, since his own expenses were so
large. Thereupon Earl Thorfinn sent men into the Islands to demand from
Rögnvald that third portion which had belonged to Earl Einar Rangmuth
(wry-mouth).

Upon receiving this message, the Earl (Rögnvald) consulted with his
friends. Then he called Earl Thorfinn’s messengers, and told them that
he had received that portion of the Islands which they claimed as a fief
from King Magnus, and that the King called it his patrimony. “It was
therefore,” he said, “in the power of King Magnus to decide which of
them should have it; and he would not give it up if the King wished him
to retain it.”

The messengers went away, and told these words to Earl Thorfinn, adding
that the third portion [which he had demanded] would certainly not be
got without trouble. On hearing this, Earl Thorfinn became very angry,
and said that it was unfair if King Magnus should have the inheritance
of his brother, adding that he had yielded to the demand more because he
was then in King Olaf’s power than because it was a just claim. “Now,”
he said, “I think Rögnvald does not return me well my good will in
having left him in quiet possession for a time, if I am not to have the
inheritance of my brother now except by fighting for it.” Now Earl
Thorfinn became so enraged that he straightway sent men to the Hebrides
and to Scotland, and collected together an army, making it known that he
would march against Rögnvald, and demand that without abatement which he
had not got when he asked peacefully for it.

When this was told to Earl Rögnvald, he called his friends together, and
complained to them of his kinsman Thorfinn intending to come and make
war on him. He then asked what help they would offer him, saying that he
would not give up his own without a trial of strength. But when he asked
them to declare themselves, their opinions were very different. Some
spoke in favour of Earl Rögnvald, and said that one could not be hard
upon him for not being willing to part with his possessions; others
again said it was excusable on the part of Earl Thorfinn to desire to
have those possessions for a while which Rögnvald had had before, and
which had belonged to Earl Einar. Further, they said it was the greatest
foolishness for Rögnvald to fight with such troops as he could get from
two-thirds of the Islands against Thorfinn, who had one-third, with
Caithness, a great deal of Scotland, and all the Hebrides besides. There
were also those who advised reconciliation. They asked Earl Rögnvald to
offer Earl Thorfinn one-half of the Islands, so that they might still be
friends, as it was meet they should be, owing to their relationship. But
when Rögnvald found that their opinions were divided, and that they all
dissuaded him from resistance, he made known his determination that he
would not part with his possessions by any arrangement, but that he
would rather leave them for a time, and go to King Magnus, his
foster-brother, and see what assistance he would give him to retain
them. Then he made ready, and went to Norway, and did not rest until he
came to King Magnus, and told him how matters stood.

The King received Earl Rögnvald very well, and invited him to stay as
long as he liked, and to receive such lands from him as were sufficient
to keep him and his men; but Earl Rögnvald said he wished assistance to
recover his possessions. King Magnus said he would certainly give him
such aid as he stood in need of. Rögnvald stayed a short time in Norway,
until he had made ready his expedition for the Orkneys. He had a
numerous and well-equipped army, which King Magnus had given him. The
King also sent word to Kálf Arnason that he should have his estates
restored to him, and be permitted to stay in Norway, if he took Earl
Rögnvald’s part in his dispute with Earl Thorfinn.




                               CHAPTER XV

                         BATTLE OF RAUDABIORG.


EARL RÖGNVALD sailed from Norway for the Orkneys, and landed in
Hjaltland (Shetland), where he collected men, and went thence to the
Orkneys. There he summoned his friends to meet him, and obtained
reinforcements. Earl Thorfinn was in Caithness, and news soon reached
him of Earl Rögnvald’s proceedings. He collected forces from Scotland
and the Sudreyar (Hebrides). Rögnvald immediately sent King Magnus’s
message to Kálf Arnason, who apparently received very well all that the
King had said. Earl Rögnvald collected his army together in the Orkneys,
intending to cross over to Caithness, and when he sailed into the
Pentland Firth he had thirty large ships. There he was met by Earl
Thorfinn, who had sixty ships, but most of them small. They met off
Raudabiorg[268] (red cliff), and at once prepared for battle.

Kálf Arnason was there also; he had six ships, all of them large, but
did not take part in the fight.

Now the battle began with the utmost fury, both Earls encouraging their
men. When the fighting had thus continued for a while, the loss of men
began to be heaviest on Earl Thorfinn’s side, the chief cause being the
great difference in the height of the ships. Thorfinn himself had a
large ship, well equipped, in which he pressed forward with great
daring; but when the smaller vessels were cleared, the Earl’s ship was
attacked from both sides, and they were placed in great danger. Many of
the Earl’s men were killed, and others dangerously wounded. Then Earl
Rögnvald commanded his men to leap on board; but when Thorfinn perceived
the imminent danger, he caused the ropes to be cut with which his ship
was fastened to the other, and rowed towards the shore. He had seventy
dead bodies removed from his ship, and all those who were disabled by
wounds went also on shore. Then Thorfinn ordered Arnór Jarlaskáld, who
was among the Earl’s men and high in his favour, to go on shore; and on
landing he sang these verses:—

                This will I not hide from comrades,
                Though ’tis right one’s chief to follow,
                Yet am I myself unwilling
                Thus to meet the son of Brúsi.
                When these Earls so fierce in battle
                Close in fight, then will our case be
                Hard beyond the case of most men
                In this trial of our friendship.

Earl Thorfinn selected the ablest of his men to man his ship, and then
he went to see Kálf Arnason, and asked his assistance. He said that Kálf
would not be able to buy king Magnus’s friendship, since he had already
been banished, and was therefore unable to keep the king’s favour, even
when they were once reconciled. “You may be sure,” he added, “that if
Rögnvald overcomes me, and he and King Magnus become masters here in the
west, you will not be welcome in this quarter, but if I come off
victorious you shall lack nothing that it is in my power to give you. If
we two keep together we shall be a match for any one here in the west,
and I hardly think you will allow yourself to lie crouching aside like a
cat among stones while I am fighting for behoof of us both. Moreover our
ties are so close that it is more seemly for us to aid each other, since
you have no ties of blood or affinity with our enemies.”

When Kálf heard Thorfinn’s persuasions he called his men and gave orders
to fall to and fight on the side of Earl Thorfinn. Now Thorfinn and Kálf
both rowed back to the fight, and when they arrived Thorfinn’s men were
ready to fly, and many of them had been slain. The Earl pushed his ship
forward against that of Earl Rögnvald, and a fierce fight ensued. As is
said by Arnór Jarlaskáld—

                Then I saw the two wealth-givers
                Hewing down each other’s warriors.
                Fierce the fight was in the Pentland,
                As the sea swelled and the red rain
                Crimsoned all the yielding timbers,
                While from shield-rims sweat of hot blood
                Dripping, stained the warriors’ garments.

Kálf attacked Rögnvald’s smaller ships, and speedily cleared them, as
there was a great difference in the height of the ships. When the hired
troops from Norway saw the vessels beside them cleared they cut away
their ship and fled. Then only a few ships remained with Earl Rögnvald,
and the victory began to lean the other way. So says Arnór Jarlaskáld:—

                 Then the prince so fierce in battle,
                 Valiant kinsman of the Vikings,
                 All the old land might have conquered
                 With assistance of the Islesmen.
                 Fewer were his slaughtered heroes;
                 But the chief’s strong men in helmets,
                 All the way to northern Hjaltland,
                 Chased the weak and flying remnant.

And when the main portion of the troops had fled, Kálf and Earl Thorfinn
attacked Earl Rögnvald’s ship together, and then a great number of his
men were slain. When he saw the imminent danger, and that he would not
be able to overcome Thorfinn and Kálf, he had the cables cut, and fled.

It was now late in the day, and darkness was coming on. Earl Rögnvald
stood out to sea the same night, and sailed for Norway, and did not stop
till he found King Magnus, who received him well, as he had done before,
and invited him to remain with him, and there he stayed some time.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                   EARL THORFINN SUBDUES THE ISLANDS.


NOW it is to be told of Earl Thorfinn that on the morning after the
battle he sent boats to all the islands to search for the fugitives.
Many were killed, and some were pardoned. Earl Thorfinn subdued all the
Islands, and made all the inhabitants his subjects, even those who had
sworn allegiance to Earl Rögnvald. Thorfinn then fixed his residence in
the Orkneys, keeping a great number of men about him; he imported
provisions from Caithness, and sent Kálf Arnason to the Sudreyar
(Hebrides), and ordered him to remain and maintain his authority there.

When Earl Rögnvald had stayed with King Magnus for some time, he said to
the King that he wished to go back to the Islands. When the King heard
this he said it was not wise, and advised him to remain until the winter
had passed away and the sea was free from ice. Yet he said that he would
give him as many men as he wanted, and a sufficient number of ships.
Rögnvald in reply said that this time he would go without the King’s
men, adding that he could not lead an army against Earl Thorfinn without
a great loss of men, as he had such extensive dominions in the west.
“This time,” he continued, “I intend to go to the west in a single ship,
as well manned as possible; thus I expect there will be no news of us
beforehand; and if I get to the Islands I shall take them by surprise,
and then we may speedily gain such a victory as could hardly, if at all,
be gained by a number of troops; but if they become aware of our
movements we can still let the sea take care of us.”

King Magnus said he might go as he pleased, and return to him when he
wished.

After this Rögnvald made his ship ready, and selected the crew
carefully. Several of King Magnus’s henchmen went with him, and
altogether he had a picked crew in his vessel. When they were ready they
sailed out to sea and had a fair wind. This was early in the winter.




                              CHAPTER XVII

                     RÖGNVALD COMES TO THE ISLANDS.


RÖGNVALD first came off the coast of Hjaltland (Shetland), and heard
that Earl Thorfinn was in the Orkneys with few men, because he did not
expect any enemies in the depth of winter. Rögnvald went straightway to
the Orkneys. Earl Thorfinn was in Hrossey,[269] suspecting nothing. When
Rögnvald arrived in the Orkneys, he went where he had heard that Earl
Thorfinn was, and came upon him unawares, so that his presence was not
known until he had secured all the doors of the house in which the Earl
and his men were. It was in the night time, and most of the men were
asleep, but the Earl was still sitting over his drink. Rögnvald and his
men set fire to the house. When Earl Thorfinn became aware of the
presence of enemies he sent men to the door to know who they were. They
were told that it was Earl Rögnvald. Then they all leaped to their
weapons, but they were unable to do anything in the way of defence, as
they were all prevented from getting out. The house was soon in flames,
and Earl Thorfinn said that permission should be asked for those to go
out who were to receive quarter. When this was asked of Earl Rögnvald he
permitted all the women and thralls to go out, but he said that most of
Thorfinn’s henchmen would be no better to him alive than dead. Those who
were spared were dragged out, and the house began to burn down. Earl
Thorfinn bethought him of a plan, and broke down part of the woodwork of
the house and leaped out there, carrying Ingibiorg, his wife, in his
arms. As the night was pitch dark he got away in the smoke unperceived
by Earl Rögnvald’s men, and during the night he rowed alone in a boat
over to Ness (Caithness). Earl Rögnvald burnt the house, with all who
were in it, and no one thought otherwise than that Earl Thorfinn had
perished there.

After this Rögnvald went over the Islands and took possession of them
all. He also sent messages over to Ness (Caithness), and to the Sudreyar
(Hebrides), to the effect that he intended to have all the dominions of
Thorfinn, and nobody spoke against him. Earl Thorfinn was then in
Caithness in hiding with his friends, and no news went abroad of his
escape from the burning.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                          EARL RÖGNVALD SLAIN.


EARL RÖGNVALD resided in Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall), and brought there all
necessaries for the winter; he had a great number of men, and
entertained them liberally. A little before Christmas the Earl went with
a numerous following into little Papey[270] to fetch malt for the
Christmas brewing. The evening which they stayed in the islands they sat
a long time round the fires to warm themselves, and he who had to keep
up the fires said they were running short of fuel. Then the Earl made a
slip of the tongue in speaking, and said: “We shall be old enough when
these fires are burnt out,” but he intended to have said that they would
be warm enough; and when he noticed his blunder he said: “I made a slip
of the tongue in speaking just now; I do not remember that I ever did so
before, and now I recollect what my foster-father King Olaf said at
Stiklestad when I noticed a slip of the tongue which he made—namely,
that if it ever so happened that I should make a slip in my speech I
should not expect to live long after it. It may be that my kinsman
Thorfinn is still alive.”

At that moment they heard that the house was surrounded by men. It was
Earl Thorfinn and his men. They set the house on fire immediately, and
heaped up a large pile before the door. Thorfinn permitted all others to
come out except Earl Rögnvald’s men, and when most of them had gone out
a man came to the door dressed in linen clothes only, and asked Earl
Thorfinn to lend a hand to the deacon; this man placed his hands on the
wall and sprang over it and over the ring of men, and came down a great
way off, and disappeared immediately in the darkness of the night. Earl
Thorfinn told his men to go after him, saying: “There went the Earl, for
that is his feat and no other man’s.” They went away, and divided into
parties to search for him. Thorkel Fóstri with some others went along
the beach, and they heard the barking of a dog among the rocks by the
sea. Earl Rögnvald had had his favourite dog with him. Thorkel had the
Earl seized, and asked his men to kill him, offering them a reward in
money. But no one would do it. So Thorkel Fóstri slew Earl Rögnvald
himself, as he knew that one of the two (Earls) must die. Then Earl
Thorfinn came up, and did not find fault with the deed. They spent the
night in the island, and all were killed who had accompanied Earl
Rögnvald thither.

Next morning they took a barge and filled it with malt; then they went
on board and ranged the shields which had belonged to Earl Rögnvald and
his men along the bulwarks, neither had they more men in the barge than
Rögnvald had had. So they rowed to Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall); and when those
of Rögnvald’s men who were there saw the vessel they thought it was Earl
Rögnvald and his men returning, and they went unarmed to meet them.
Thorfinn seized thirty of them and slew them; most of them were henchmen
and friends of King Magnus. To one of the King’s henchmen the Earl gave
quarter, and told him to go east to Norway and tell King Magnus the
tidings.




                              CHAPTER XIX

                        EARL RÖGNVALD’S BURIAL.


THE body of Earl Rögnvald was brought to the larger Papey[271] and
buried there. Men said that he was one of the most accomplished and
best-beloved of all the Earls of the Orkneys; and his death was greatly
lamented by all the people.

After this Earl Thorfinn took possession of the whole of the Islands,
and no one spoke against him.

Early in the spring these tidings came east to Norway to King Magnus. He
regarded the death of Rögnvald, his foster-brother, as a great loss, and
said he would avenge him by and by, but just then he was at war with
King Swein, Ulf’s son.[272]




                               CHAPTER XX

                  EARL THORFINN COMES TO KING HARALD.


ABOUT this time King Harald, Sigurd’s son,[273] King Magnus’s uncle,
arrived in Norway, and King Magnus gave him the half of the kingdom. One
winter they called out men from the whole of Norway, intending to go
south to Denmark, but while they lay in Seley[274] two war ships rowed
into the harbour and up to King Magnus’s ship. A man in a white cloak
went from the [strange] ship, and along the [King’s] ship, and up to the
quarterdeck. The King sat at meat; the man saluted him, and taking up a
loaf he broke it and ate of it. The King received his salutation, and
handed the cup to him when he saw that he ate the bread. The King looked
at him and said: “Who is this man?”

“My name is Thorfinn,” he said.

“Art thou Earl Thorfinn?” said the King.

“So am I called in the west,” he said, “and I am here with two ships of
twenty benches, well manned considering our means, and I wish now to
join in this expedition with you, if you will accept my assistance; all
my men and I myself are in God’s power and yours, my lord, on account of
my great misdeeds by which I have offended you.”

In the meantime some men gathered together and listened to their
conversation.

“It is true, Earl Thorfinn” (said the King), “that I intended, in case
we should meet, that you should not have to tell of our parting, but now
matters stand so that it does not become my dignity to have you slain,
and you shall go with me now, but the terms of our reconciliation I will
declare when I am more at leisure.”

Earl Thorfinn thanked the King and returned to his ship. The King stayed
a long time in Seley, and men gathered to him from Vík;[275] for he
intended to sail to Jutland when he obtained a fair wind. Thorfinn was
often in conversation with the King, who treated him in a friendly
manner, and had him frequently present at his councils.

One day the Earl went on board the King’s ship, and went up to the poop.
The King asked him to sit down. The Earl sat down, and they both drank
together and were merry. A tall brave-looking man, dressed in a red
tunic, came to the poop and saluted the King, who received his greeting
graciously. He was one of the King’s henchmen. He said: “I have come to
see you, Earl Thorfinn.”

“What is your business with me?” said the Earl.

“I wish to know what compensation you intend to give me for my brother
who was killed by your orders out west in Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall), along
with others of King Magnus’s henchmen.”

“Have you never heard,” said the Earl, “that it is not my wont to pay
money for the men whom I cause to be killed?”

“I have nothing to do with how you have treated other people, if you pay
the manbote for him for whom it devolves on me to seek compensation. I
also lost some money there myself, and was shamefully treated. It is
more binding on me than any one else to seek redress for my brother and
myself, and therefore I now demand it. The King may remit offences
committed against himself, even if he thinks it of no importance that
his henchmen are led out and slaughtered like sheep.”

The Earl answered: “I understand it to be to my advantage here that I am
not in your power. Are not you the man to whom I gave quarter there?”

“True enough,” said he, “it was in your power to have killed me like the
others.”

Then the Earl said: “Now the saying proves true—‘That often happens to
many which they least expect.’ I never thought I should be so placed
that it would be injurious to me to have been too generous to my
enemies; but now I have to pay for having given you quarter; you would
not have denounced me to-day in the presence of chiefs if I had caused
you to be killed like your comrades.”

The King looked at the Earl and said: “There it comes out still, Earl
Thorfinn, that you think you have killed too few of my henchmen without
compensation.” While saying this the king turned blood-red [with anger].
The Earl started up and left the poop, and returned to his own ship, and
all was quiet during the evening. In the morning, when the men awoke, a
fair wind had sprung up, and they rowed away from the harbour. The King
sailed south to Jutland with the whole fleet. In the earlier part of the
day the Earl’s ship stood out farther to sea, and in the afternoon he
took a westerly course, and there is nothing to be told of him till he
arrived in the Orkneys, and resumed the government of his dominions.

King Magnus and Harald sailed to Denmark, and spent the summer there.
King Swein was unwilling to meet them, and stayed in Skàney[276] with
his army. That summer King Magnus was seized with an illness of which he
died; but he had previously declared that he gave the whole kingdom of
Norway to his uncle Harald.




                              CHAPTER XXI

           EARL THORFINN’S MESSAGE TO KING HARALD (HARDRADI).


EARL THORFINN now ruled the Orkneys and all his dominions. Kálf Arnason
was frequently with him. Sometimes he made viking expeditions to the
west, and plundered in Scotland and Ireland. He was also in England, and
at one time he was the chief of the Thingmen.

When Earl Thorfinn heard of the death of King Magnus, he sent men to
Norway to King Harald with a friendly message, saying that he wished to
become his friend. When the messengers reached the King he received them
well, and promised the Earl his friendship. When the Earl received this
message from the King he made himself ready, taking from the west two
ships of twenty benches, with more than a hundred men, all fine troops,
and went east to Norway. He found the King in Hördaland, and he received
him exceedingly well, and at their parting the King gave him handsome
presents. From thence the Earl went southwards along the coast to
Denmark. He went through the country, and found King Svein in
Alaborg;[277] he invited him to stay, and made a splendid feast for him.
Then the Earl made it known that he was going to Rome;[278] but when he
came to Saxland he called on the Emperor Heinrek, who received him
exceedingly well, and gave him many valuable presents. He also gave him
many horses, and the Earl rode south to Rome, and saw the Pope, from
whom he obtained absolution for all his sins.

Then the Earl returned, and arrived safely home in his dominions. He
left off making war expeditions, and turned his mind to the government
of his land and his people, and to the making of laws. He resided
frequently in Birgishérad (Birsay), and built there Christ’s Kirk, a
splendid church; and there was the first Bishop’s see in the Orkneys.

Thorfinn’s wife was Ingibiorg, [called] the mother of the Earls. They
had two sons who arrived at manhood; one was called Paul, the other
Erlend. They were men of large stature, fine-looking, wise, and gentle,
more resembling their mother’s relations. They were much loved by the
Earl and all the people.




                              CHAPTER XXII

                       OF EARL THORFINN’s DEATH.


EARL THORFINN retained all his dominions to his dying day, and it is
truly said that he was the most powerful of all the Earls of the
Orkneys. He obtained possession of eleven Earldoms in Scotland, all the
Sudreyar (Hebrides), and a large territory in Ireland. So says Arnór
Jarlaskáld—

                Unto Thorfinn, ravens’ feeder,
                Armies had to yield obedience
                From Thussasker[279] right on to Dublin.
                Truth I tell, as is recorded.

Earl Thorfinn was five winters old when Malcolm[280] the King of Scots,
his mother’s father, gave him the title of Earl, and after that he was
Earl for seventy winters. He died towards the end of Harald Sigurdson’s
reign.[281] He is buried at Christ’s Kirk in Birgishérad (Birsay), which
he had built. He was much lamented in his hereditary dominions; but in
those parts which he had conquered by force of arms many considered it
very hard to be under his rule, and [after his death] many provinces
which he had subdued turned away and sought help from the chiefs who
were odal-born to the government of them.[282] Then it soon became
apparent how great a loss Thorfinn’s death was to his dominions.

The following stanzas were made about the battle between Earl Rögnvald,
Brùsi’s son, and Earl Thorfinn:—

                 Since the Earls have broken friendship
                 Peace I can enjoy no longer.
                 Feasts of corpses to the ravens
                 Each has in his turn provided.
                 Off the Islands were the blue tents
                 By the mighty rent asunder,
                 Dabbled were the foul birds’ feathers
                 In red blood ’neath lofty branches.

                 Have ye heard how Kalfr followed
                 Finnr’s son-in-law in battle?
                 Quickly didst thou push thy vessels
                 ’Gainst the Earl’s ships on the water.
                 To destroy the son of Brúsi,
                 Thou, courageous ship’s commander
                 Wast unwilling, but of hatred
                 Mindful, didst thou help Thorfinn.

                 When the Earls had joined in battle
                 Misery there was unbounded.
                 Thick and fast the men were falling
                 In the struggle; sad the hour when
                 Nearer went the daring Eastmen
                 To the unexampled fire-rain.
                 In that battle off the Red Biorg
                 Many a noble man was wounded.

                 Swarthy shall become the bright sun,
                 In the black sea shall the earth sink,
                 Finished shall be Austri’s labour,
                 And the wild sea hide the mountains,
                 Ere there be in those fair Islands
                 Born a chief to rule the people—
                 May our God both help and keep them—
                 Greater than the lost Earl Thorfinn.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

             OF THE EARLS PAUL AND ERLEND, AND GENEALOGIES.


NOW the sons of Earl Thorfinn succeeded him. Paul was the elder of the
two, and he ruled for both of them. They did not divide their
possessions, yet they almost always agreed in their dealings.

Ingibiorg, the mother of the Earls, was married to Malcolm, King of
Scots,[283] who was called Langháls (Longneck), and their son was
Duncan, King of Scots, the father of William the excellent man; his son
was called William Odling (the Noble), whom all the Scots wished to have
for their King.[284]

Earl Paul, Thorfinn’s son, married the daughter of Earl Hákon, Ivar’s
son, by whom he had many children. They had a son called Hákon, and a
daughter called Thóra, who was married in Norway to Haldór, son of
Brynjúlf Ulfaldi (camel). Another son of theirs, named Brynjúlf, married
Gyrid, Dag’s daughter. A second daughter of Paul, called Ingirid, was
married to Einar Vorsakrák. Herbiörg was the third daughter of Paul. She
was the mother of Ingibiorg Ragna, who was married to Sigurd of
Westness; their sons were Hákon Pík, and Brynjúlf. Sigrid was a second
daughter of Herbiörg. She was the mother of Hakon Barn and of Herborg,
who was married to Kolbein Hruga. The fourth daughter of Earl Paul was
Ragnhild, who was the mother of Benidikt, the father of Ingibiorg, the
mother of Erling Erkidiákn (archdeacon). Ragnhild had a daughter, by
name Bergliót, who was married to Hávard, Gunnar’s son. Their sons were
Magnus, Hákon Kló (claw), Dúfniál, and Thorstein. All those were the
families of Earls and chiefs in the Orkneys, and all of them will be
mentioned in this Saga afterwards. The wife of Earl Erlend, Thorfinn’s
son, was Thóra, the daughter of Sumarlidi, Ospak’s son; the mother of
Ospak was Thórdís, the daughter of Hall of Sída (in Iceland). Their sons
were Erling and Magnus, and their daughters Gunnhild, and Cecilia, who
was married to Isak, and their sons were Indridi and Kol. Erling had a
natural daughter called Játvör; her son was Berg.




                              CHAPTER XXIV

       HERE IS TOLD OF THE DEATH OF KING HARALD AND HIS DAUGHTER.


When the brothers Paul and Erlend had succeeded to the government of the
Orkneys, King Harald Sigurdson (Hardradi) came from Norway with a large
army. He first touched Hjaltland; from thence he went to the Orkneys,
and left there his Queen Ellisif, and their daughters Maria and
Ingigerd. From the Orkneys he had many troops; both the Earls went with
him on the expedition. He went from Orkney to England, and landed at a
place called Klifland (Cleaveland), and took Skardaborg (Scarborough).
Then he touched at Hallarnes (Holderness), and had a battle there, in
which he was victorious. The Wednesday next before Matthiasmas (20th
September) he had a battle at Jórvík (York) with the Earls Valthióf and
Mórukári. Mórukári was slain there.[285] Next Sunday the borg at
Stamfordbridge surrendered to him; and he went on shore to arrange the
government of the town; and there he left his son Olaf, the Earls Paul
and Erlend, and his brother-in-law Eystein Orri. While he was on shore
he was met by Harald Gudinason (Godwinson) at the head of a numerous
army. In that battle King Harald Sigurdson fell. After the death of the
King, Eystein Orri and the Earls arrived from the ship, and made a stout
resistance. There Eystein Orri fell, and almost the whole army of the
Northmen with him.

After the battle King Harald (Godwinson) permitted Olaf, the son of King
Harald Sigurdson, and the Earls to leave England, with all the troops
that had not fled. Olaf sailed in the autumn from Hrafnseyri[286] to the
Orkneys. The same day and at the same hour as King Harald fell, his
daughter Maria died, and it is said that they had but one life.

Olaf spent the winter in the Orkneys, and was very friendly to the
Earls, his kinsmen. Thóra, the mother of King Olaf, and Ingibiorg, the
mother of the Earls, were daughters of two brothers. In the spring Olaf
went to Norway, and was made King along with his brother Magnus.

While the brothers (Paul and Erlend) ruled the Orkneys they agreed
extremely well a long time; but when their sons came to manhood Erling
and Hákon became very violent. Magnus was the quietest of them all. They
were all men of large stature, and strong, and accomplished in
everything. Hákon, Paul’s son, wished to take the lead among his
brothers; he considered himself of higher birth than the sons of Erlend,
as he was the daughter’s son of Earl Hákon Ivar’s son, and Ragnhild, the
daughter of King Magnus the Good. Hákon wished his friends to have the
lion’s share of everything before those who leant to the sons of Erlend,
but Erlend did not like his sons to be inferior to any in the Islands.
Matters went so far that the kinsmen could not be together without
danger. Then their fathers persuaded them to compose their differences.
A meeting was appointed, but it soon became apparent that each [of the
fathers] was inclined to take the part of his sons, and therefore they
did not agree. Thus dissensions arose between the brothers, and they
parted without coming to an agreement, which was by many considered a
great misfortune.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                          A MEETING OF PEACE.


AFTER this well-disposed men interfered and tried to reconcile them. A
meeting for reconciliation was appointed in Hrossey,[287] and at that
meeting they made peace on the understanding that the Islands should be
divided in two shares, as they had been between Thorfinn and Brúsi, and
thus matters stood for a while.

When Hákon had arrived at the age of manhood he was continually on war
expeditions. He became a very violent man, and greatly molested those
who adhered to Erlend and his sons; and this went so far that they came
to open enmity a second time, and attacked each other with numerous
troops. Hávard, Gunnar’s son, and all the principal friends of the
Earls, consulted once more and tried to make peace between them. This
time Erlend and his sons refused to make peace if Hákon remained in the
Islands; and because their friends considered their quarrels so
dangerous to themselves, they besought Hákon not to let the condition
that he should leave the Islands for a time stand in the way of peace.
Then, by the advice of good men, they became reconciled.

After this Hákon left the Islands, and first went east to Norway, and
saw there King Olaf Kyrri (the quiet), and stayed with him for a while.
This was towards the end of his reign. After that he went east to Sweden
to King Ingi, Steinkel’s son, who received him well. He found friends
and kinsmen there, and was highly honoured on account of the esteem in
which Hákon, his mother’s father, was held. He had possessions from
Steinkel, the King of the Swedes, ever since he was banished by King
Harald, Sigurd’s son, and became greatly beloved both by the King and
the people. A second daughter’s son of Earl Hákon, Ivar’s son, was Hákon
who was called the Norwegian; he was the father of King Eirík Spaki (the
wise), who was King of Denmark after Eirík Eymuni (the ever-remembered).

Hákon remained in Sweden for a while, and was well treated by King Ingi.
But when some time had passed in this way he felt so home-sick that he
wanted to go west again to the Islands. Christianity then was young, and
newly planted in Sweden. Many men still dabbled in ancient lore, and
were persuaded that by such means they were able to ascertain future
events. King Ingi was a good Christian man, and loathed all those that
meddled in ancient [superstitious] lore, and made strenuous efforts to
abolish the evil customs which for a long time had accompanied
heathenism; but the chiefs and leading Bœndr murmured loudly if they
were reproved for their evil habits, and at last matters went so far
that the Bœndr elected another King, Swein, the brother of the Queen,
who permitted them to make sacrifices, and was therefore called
“Sacrificing Swein.” King Ingi had to flee from him to Western Gautland
(Gothland); but their dealings ended thus, that King Ingi caught Swein
by surprise in a house, and burnt the house and him in it. After this he
subdued the whole country, and uprooted many wicked customs.




                              CHAPTER XXVI

                     OF THE WORDS OF THE SPAE-MAN.


WHEN Hákon, Paul’s son, was in Sweden he had heard of a man in that
country who practised sorcery and spae-craft, whether he used for those
purposes witchcraft or other magical arts. Hákon became very curious to
see this man, and anxious to know what he could ascertain about his
future. So he went in search of the man, and at last he found him in a
seaside district, where he went from one feast to another, and foretold
the seasons and other things to the country people. When Hákon had found
this man, he inquired of him whether he would succeed in regaining his
dominions, or what other fortune awaited him. The spae-man asked him who
he was, and he told him his name and family—that he was the daughter’s
son of Hákon, Ivar’s son.

The spae-man then said: “Why should you ask foresight or knowledge of
the future from me? You know well that your kinsmen have had little
liking for such men as I am; and yet it might be necessary for you to
try to ascertain your fate from your friend, Olaf the Stout, in whom all
your faith is placed; but I suspect that he would not condescend to tell
you what you are anxious to know, or else he may not be so mighty as you
call him.”

Hákon answered: “I will not reproach him, and I should rather think I
was not worthy to learn wisdom from him, than that he was incapable; so
that I might learn from him for that matter. But I have come to you,
because I thought that we had no reason to envy each other on account of
virtue or religion.”

The spae-man replied: “I am glad to find that you place your entire
trust in me, and not in that faith which you and your kinsmen profess.
Truly they who apply themselves to such things are strange men. They
keep fasts and vigils, and believe that by such means they will be able
to ascertain that which they desire to know; but the more they apply
themselves to these things, the less they ascertain of what they wish to
know when it is most important to them to know it. But we undergo no
bodily pains, yet we always obtain knowledge of those things which it is
of importance to our friends not to be ignorant of. Now matters will go
between us in this way, that I shall help you because I understand that
you think you will rather obtain the truth from me than from the
preachers of King Ingi, in whom he puts his entire trust. After three
nights’ time you shall come to me, and then we shall try whether I may
be able to tell you any of the things you wish to know.”

Upon this they parted, and Hákon stayed in the district. When three
nights had passed, he went again to see the spae-man. He was in a
certain house alone, and groaned heavily as Hákon entered. He passed his
hand across his forehead, and said that it had cost him much pain to
obtain the knowledge which Hákon desired. Hákon then said he wished to
hear his future.

The spae-man said: “If you wish your whole fate unfolded, it is long to
tell, for there is a great future in store for you, and grand events
will happen at certain periods of your life. I foresee that you will at
last become the sole ruler of the Orkneys; but you will perhaps think
you have long to wait. I also see that your sons will rule there. Your
next journey to the Orkneys will be a very eventful one, when its
consequences appear. In your days you will also commit a crime,[288] for
which you may or may not obtain pardon from the God in whom you believe.
Your steps go farther out into the world than I am able to trace, yet I
think you will rest your bones in the northern parts. Now I have told
you what has been given me to tell you at this time, but what
satisfaction you may have derived from your visit rests with yourself.”

Hákon replied: “Great things you have foretold, if they turn out to be
true; but I think my fate will prove itself better than you have said;
and perhaps you have not seen the truth.”

The spae-man said he was free to believe what he liked of it, but that
such events would not the less surely come to pass.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                  OF THE SCHEMES OF HAKON, PAUL’S SON.


AFTER this Hákon went to see King Ingi, and stayed with him a short
while. Then he obtained leave from the King to depart. He went first to
Norway to see his kinsman, King Magnus, who received him very well.
There he heard that the government of the Orkneys was almost exclusively
in the hands of Earl Erlend and his sons, and that they were greatly
loved, but that his father Paul took little part in the government. He
also thought he could perceive from conversations with men from the
Orkneys, who gave him a true account of the state of matters, that the
Orkneymen had no desire for his return home. They were living in peace
and quiet, and were afraid that Hákon’s return would give rise to
disturbance and strife. When Hákon was turning this over in his mind, he
thought it likely that his kinsmen would try to keep him out of his
possessions, and that it would be dangerous for him if he did not go
west with a numerous retinue. Then he devised a scheme to induce King
Magnus to put him into his possessions in the Orkneys.




                             CHAPTER XXVIII

                  HAKON’S INTERVIEW WITH KING MAGNUS.


THIS was after King Magnus had put Steigar Thórir and Egil to death, and
put down all opposition to his rule. Hákon was a sagacious man, and he
thought he could understand from King Magnus’s conversation that he was
ambitious of grand undertakings, and covetous of the possessions of
other rulers. Hákon began to tell the King that it would be a princely
feat to make an expedition to the west, and subdue the Islands, as
Harald the Fairhaired had done. He also said that if he established his
power in the Sudreyar (Hebrides), he might easily make forays into
Ireland and Scotland from them. Then, having subdued the western
countries, he might attack the English, with the help of the Northmen,
and thus take revenge for his grandfather Harald, Sigurd’s son.

When they were speaking about these things, it became evident that the
King was pleased with this proposal, and said it was spoken like a
nobleman, and quite according to his own mind. “But I wish you not to be
surprised, Hákon,” said the King, “in case I shall be persuaded by your
words to carry an army into the west, if I put forward a strong claim to
the possessions there, without regard to the claims of any man.”

When Hákon heard this suggestion, he was not so well pleased, because he
suspected the real meaning of the King’s words; and after this he no
longer persuaded the King to go; neither was it required, for after
their conversation, the King sent messages throughout his dominions to
make known that he was soon to lead out an expedition, and then he made
it known to the people that he was going to the west, whatever might be
the result. Preparations were made for the expedition throughout the
whole kingdom. King Magnus took with him his son Sigurd, who was eight
winters old, and a hopeful boy.




                              CHAPTER XXIX

               THE WESTERN EXPEDITION OF MAGNUS BARELEGS.


WHEN the brothers Paul and Erlend ruled the Orkneys, King Magnus came
from Norway. He had a large army. Many of his vassals followed him,
among whom were Vidkunn Jonsson, Sigurd Hrani’s son, Serk from Sogn, Dag
Eilif’s son, Skapti from Gizki, Ogmund, Finn and Thórd, Eyvind Olnbogi
(the King’s High Steward), Kali, Snæbiörn’s son from Agdir, the son of
Thorleif Spaki (the wise) who was maimed by Hallfred, and Kol his son.
Kali was a very wise man, much esteemed by the king, and made verses
well.

When King Magnus came to the Orkneys, he seized the Earls Paul and
Erlend, and sent them east to Norway, but placed his son Sigurd over the
Isles, and gave him counsellors. King Magnus went to the Sudreyar
(Hebrides), accompanied by Magnus and Erling, the sons of Earl Erlend,
and Hákon, Paul’s son. But when King Magnus came to the Islands, he
began hostilities first at Liódhús (Lewis), and gained a victory there.
In this expedition he subdued the whole of the Sudreyar, and seized
Lögman, the son of Gudröd, King of the Western Islands. Thence he went
to Bretland (Wales), and fought a great battle in Anglesea Sound with
two British chiefs[289]—Hugh the Stout and Hugh the Bold. When the men
took up their arms and buckled for the fight, Magnus, Erlend’s son, sat
down on the foredeck, and did not take his arms. The King asked why he
did not do so. He said he had nothing against any one there, and would
not therefore fight.

The King said: “Go down below, and do not lie among other people’s feet
if you dare not fight, for I do not believe that you do this from
religious motives.”

Magnus took a psalter and sang during the battle, and did not shelter
himself. The battle was long and fiercely contested, and both swords and
missiles were used. For a long time the result of the battle was
doubtful. King Magnus shot from a bow, and a man from Hálogaland[290]
was with him. Hugh the Bold fought valiantly. He had a suit of armour
which covered him entirely, except his eyes. King Magnus ordered the man
from Hálogaland to shoot at the same time as he did, and they shot both
at once. One of the arrows struck the nose-piece of the helmet, and the
other pierced the eye, and that was said to be the king’s arrow.




                              CHAPTER XXX

                             KALI’S DEATH.


AFTER Hugh’s death the British (Normans) fled, and King Magnus obtained
a great victory. He lost there many brave men, and many others were
wounded. Kali had received many wounds, but none mortal. After the
battle King Magnus sailed from the south along the coasts of Bretland
and Scotland, having conquered all the Sudreyar and Anglesea, which is
one-third of Bretland.

King Magnus had appointed Magnus, Erlend’s son, as one of the waiters at
his table, and he performed continually the duties of that office; but
after the battle in Anglesea Sound the king showed that Magnus had
incurred his serious displeasure. He had not been wounded, although he
had not sheltered himself. During the night he stole away from the King,
and hid himself for some time in the woods, while the King’s men made a
search for him. Magnus made his way to the court of Malcolm,[291] the
King of Scots, and remained there a while. For some time he was with a
certain bishop in Bretland. He was also in England; but he did not come
to the Orkneys while King Magnus was alive.

King Magnus held northward, along the coasts of Scotland, and messengers
came to him from Malcolm, the King of Scots, to ask for peace. They said
that the King of Scots was willing to give him all the islands lying
west of Scotland, between which and the mainland he could pass in a
vessel with the rudder shipped. Thereupon King Magnus landed in Satiri
(Kintyre), and had a boat drawn across the neck (isthmus) of
Satiri,[292] he himself holding the helm, and thus he gained possession
of the whole of Satiri, which is better than the best island of the
Sudreyar, Man excepted. It is in the west of Scotland, and on the land
side there is a narrow isthmus, across which vessels are frequently
drawn. Thence King Magnus went to the Sudreyar, and sent his men into
Scotland’s Fiord.[293] They rowed in along one coast and out along
another, and thus took possession of all the islands west of Scotland.

Then the King made it known that he was going to spend the winter in the
Sudreyar, but gave permission to those who had most urgent business to
go home. When the troops knew this, they all wished to go home, and
murmured greatly at being longer detained. The King then held a council
with his advisers, and looked at the wounds of his men. He saw Kali, and
asked about his wounds. Kali said they did not heal well, and that he
did not know what the end would be. The King asked for his advice. Kali
said: “Is it not so that your friends are now failing you?” The King
said he did not think so. Kali asked him to hold a wapinschaw, and thus
to ascertain the number of his troops. This the King did; then he missed
many men. This he told to Kali. Then Kali sang:

                  How do thy great chiefs repay thee
                  For the bounties lavished on them?
                  Now, O King, of this make trial—
                  On western currents ships are shaken.

The King replied:

                  Surely it was in my folly
                  That my wealth I gave to these men;
                  Yet my long ships, swiftly speeding,
                  Still shall climb the chilly billows.

After this the King kept a watch to prevent men from deserting.

When King Magnus was in the Sudreyar, he obtained the hand of Biadmonia,
the daughter of Mýrkiartan,[294] the son of Thiálbi, the King of the
Irish in Kunnáttir (Connaught), for his son Sigurd, who was then nine
winters old, and she five. This winter Kali died from his wounds. Sigurd
Sneis (slice), Kali’s kinsman, a Lenderman from Agdir, had fallen in
Anglesea Sound.




                              CHAPTER XXXI

                       BIRTH OF KALI, SON OF KOL.


EARLY in the spring King Magnus left the Sudreyar, and went first to the
Orkneys, where he heard of the death of the Earls. Erlend died in
Nidaros,[295] and was buried there; and Paul died in Biörgvin (Bergen).
Then King Magnus married Gunnhild, the daughter of Earl Erlend, to Kol,
Kali’s son, in order to compensate him for (the loss of) his father. Her
dowry consisted of possessions in the Orkneys, including a farm at
Papul.[296] Some say that Erling, Erlend’s son, fell in Anglesea Sound,
but Snorri Sturluson says he fell in Uladstir[297] with King Magnus. At
his wedding Kol became King Magnus’s vassal. Afterwards he went to
Norway with the King, and home to Agdir with his wife, and went to
reside at his estates there. Kol and Gunnhild had two children; their
son was called Kali, and their daughter Ingirid. They were both very
promising children, and brought up with affectionate care.




                             CHAPTER XXXII.

                           SIGURD MADE KING.


When Magnus had been king nine winters, he went to the west, and made
war in Ireland, and spent the winter in Kunnáttir (Connaught). The next
summer, on St. Bartholomew’s Day, he fell in Uladstir (Ulster). When
Sigurd heard in the Orkneys of the death of his father, he went
immediately to Norway, and was made king, along with his brothers
Eystein and Olaf. He had left the daughter of the Irish king in the
west.

One winter or two after the death of King Magnus, Hákon, Paul’s son,
came from the west, and the kings gave him an earl’s title and
possessions beseeming his birth. Then he returned to the west and took
possession of the Orkneys. He had always accompanied King Magnus while
he was alive. He was with him in his expedition to Gautland, which is
mentioned in the song made about Hákon, Paul’s son.




                             CHAPTER XXXIII

            MAGNUS (ERLEND’S SON) OBTAINS THE TITLE OF EARL.


WHEN Earl Hákon had ruled the Orkneys for some time, Magnus, the son of
Earl Erlend, came from Scotland, and wished to take possession of his
patrimony. The Bœndr were highly pleased with this, for he was beloved
among them, and had many kinsmen and connections who wished to help him
to his dominions. His mother was married to a man called Sigurd. Their
son was named Hákon Karl (man). They had estates in Papul. When Earl
Hákon heard that Earl Magnus had come to the Orkneys, he collected men
together, and refused to give up any part of the Islands. But their
friends tried to make peace between them, and at last they succeeded so
far that Hákon consented to give up half of his dominions if the Kings
of Norway approved of it. Magnus went immediately to Norway to see King
Eystein, for King Sigurd had then gone to Jerusalem.[298] King Eystein
received him exceedingly well, and gave up to him his patrimony,
one-half of the Orkneys, with the title of Earl. Thereupon Magnus went
west to his dominions, and his kinsmen and friends and all the people
were glad to see him back. Through the kind offices of mutual friends,
Magnus and Hákon agreed very well. So long as their friendship continued
there were good times and peace in the Orkneys.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV

                     OF EARL MAGNUS (ERLEND’S SON).


THE holy Magnus, Earl of the Islands, was a most excellent man. He was
of large stature, a man of a noble presence and intellectual
countenance. He was of blameless life, victorious in battles, wise,
eloquent, strong-minded, liberal and magnanimous, sagacious in counsels,
and more beloved than any other man. To wise men and good he was gentle
and affable in his conversation; but severe and unsparing with robbers
and vikings. Many of those who plundered the landowners and the
inhabitants of the land he caused to be put to death. He also seized
murderers and thieves, and punished rich and poor impartially for
robberies and thefts and all crimes. He was just in his judgments, and
had more respect to divine justice than difference in the estates of
men. He gave large presents to chiefs and rich men, yet the greatest
share of his liberality was given to the poor. In all things he strictly
obeyed the divine commands; and he chastened his body in many things,
which in his glorious life were known to God, but hidden from men. Thus,
he made known his intention to espouse a maiden of a most excellent
family in Scotland, and having celebrated his marriage, he lived with
her for ten winters free from the defilement of carnal lusts, for he was
pure and spotless with regard to all such sins, and if he were tempted,
he bathed in cold water, and prayed for divine assistance. Many other
glorious virtues he exhibited to God himself, but concealed from men.




                              CHAPTER XXXV

                          OF MAGNUS AND HAKON.


MAGNUS and Hákon ruled their lands and defended them for some time, the
two agreeing very well. In a song made about them, it is said that they
fought with a chief called Dúfniál, their third cousin, who fell before
them. They also slew a famous man named Thorbiörn, in Borgarfiord,[299]
in Hjaltland. Other deeds of theirs are set forth in song, though not
specially narrated here. When they had ruled the land for some time, it
happened, as often is the case, that men of evil dispositions were found
who destroyed their good understanding. Hákon was more disposed to
listen to these miserable men, because he was very jealous of the
popularity and greatness of his kinsman Magnus.




                             CHAPTER XXXVI

                            OF EARL MAGNUS.


TWO men with Earl Hákon are chiefly mentioned as being the worst in
creating enmity between the two kinsmen. These were Sigurd and Sighvat
Sokki (sock). Through the slander of wicked men this enmity went so far
that the Earls gathered troops together and went to meet each other.
Both went to Hrossey, where the Orkney Thingstead[300] was, and when
they arrived there, both drew up their troops in battle array, and
prepared to fight. There were both the Earls and all the chief men, many
(of whom) were friends of both, and did all they could to make peace
between them, showing much goodwill and virtuous disposition. This
meeting was during Lent. But, as many well-disposed men joined
themselves together to avert hostilities between them, and to assist
neither of them against the other, they confirmed their reconciliation
with oaths and shaking of hands.

Some time after this, Earl Hákon, with hypocrisy and fair words,
appointed a day of meeting with the blessed Earl Magnus, so that their
friendship and the newly-made peace should neither be disturbed nor
destroyed. This meeting, which was to confirm their peace and
reconciliation, should take place in the spring, in the Pasch week, in
Egilsey.[301] Earl Magnus was well pleased with this arrangement, as he
thought it was meant to confirm a sincere peace, without any suspicions,
treachery, or covetousness. Each of them should have two ships and an
equal number of men (at the conference). Both swore to keep the peace,
on conditions dictated by the wisest men.

Immediately after Easter, preparations were made for the meeting. Earl
Magnus summoned all those whom he knew to be best disposed to him, and
most likely to make matters smooth between them. He had two ships, and
as many men as had been agreed upon, and when he was ready he went to
Egilsey. As they were rowing in calm and smooth water a great wave rose
under the ship, which was steered by the Earl, and broke over it where
he sat. His men wondered very much at such an occurrence,—that a breaker
should rise in smooth water where no man could remember a breaker to
have arisen, and where the water was so deep. Then the Earl said: “No
wonder that you are surprised at this. Indeed, I take this as a
foreboding of my death. Perhaps it will come to pass as was prophesied
about Earl Hákon, and this may be to prepare us for Hákon, my kinsman,
not dealing honestly with me at this meeting.” The Earl’s men became
very sorrowful when he spoke of his death being near at hand, and begged
him to take care of his life, and not to trust himself to the good faith
of Earl Hákon. Earl Magnus answered: “Let us go this time, and let all
that depends on our journey be in God’s will.”




                             CHAPTER XXXVII

                      EARL HAKON AND EARL MAGNUS.


NOW it is to be told of Earl Hákon that he gathered together a numerous
army, and had many ships equipped as if for battle. And when the troops
were assembled, he made known to his men that he intended that this
meeting should decide between him and Earl Magnus, so that both of them
should not rule over the Orkneys. Many of his men approved of this plan,
adding many wicked suggestions to it, yet Sigurd and Sighvat Sokki
counselled the worst things.

Then they began to row fast, and went along quickly. Hávard, Gunnar’s
son, who was the friend and counsellor of the Earls, and equally
faithful to both, was on board the Earl’s ship. Hákon had concealed this
wicked plan from him, in which he would by no means have had any part.
And when he knew that the Earl was so resolute in this wicked purpose,
he jumped overboard, and swam to a certain uninhabited island.

Earl Magnus arrived first with his men at Egilsey, and when they saw
Earl Hákon coming they perceived that he had eight war-ships. Then Earl
Magnus suspected that he intended to act treacherously towards him. So
he walked along the island with his men, and went into the church to
pray. His men offered to defend him. The Earl replied: “I will not put
your lives in danger for mine, and if peace cannot be established
between us, let it be as God wills.” His men now recognised the truth of
his words, and as he foreknew the hours of his life—whether from his
wisdom or from a divine revelation—he would neither fly nor avoid his
enemies. He prayed devoutly, and had a mass sung for him.




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

                       THE OFFERS OF EARL MAGNUS.


HAKON and his men came up in the morning, and ran first to the church
and ransacked it, but did not find the Earl. He had gone to another part
of the island, to a certain hiding-place, accompanied by two men. But
when the holy Earl Magnus saw that they searched for him, he called to
them, and thus made known to them where he was, and said they need
search no farther. And when Hákon saw him, he and his men ran thither
with loud yelling and clangour of their weapons.

Earl Magnus was praying when they came up to him, and when he had
finished his prayer he made the sign of the cross, and said firmly to
Earl Hákon: “You did not act well, kinsman, when you broke your oaths,
and it is highly probable that you were instigated to this more by the
wickedness of others than your own. Now, I will make you three offers,
that you may rather accept one of them than break your oaths, and slay
me who am innocent.”

Hákon’s men asked what these offers were.

“The first is, that I shall go to Rome, or away to Jerusalem, and visit
the holy places, taking with me two ships from the Orkneys, with the
necessary equipment for the journey, and obtain benefits for the souls
of us both. I shall swear never to return to the Orkneys.”

This offer was promptly rejected.

Then said Earl Magnus: “Now, because my life is in your power, and I
have offended against Almighty God in many things, you shall send me to
Scotland, to our mutual friends, and keep me in custody there, with two
men for companionship. Make such provision that I shall not be able to
escape from this custody.”

This too was promptly refused.

Magnus then said: “There is yet one more offer which I will make, and
God knows that I think more of your soul than of my own life, for it
were better that you should do as I shall offer you than that you should
take my life. Let me be maimed as you like, or deprived of my eyes, and
throw me into a dark dungeon.”

Then said Earl Hákon: “This offer I accept, and I ask for no more.”

But the chiefs started up and said to Earl Hákon: “One of you will we
kill now, and from this day you shall not both rule the lands of the
Orkneys.”

Earl Hákon replied: “Slay him then, for I will rather have earldom and
lands than instant death.”

Thus their conversation was related by Höldbodi, a truthful Bondi in the
Sudreyar, who was one of the two of Earl Magnus’s men who were with him
when he was taken.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX

                     THE BEHEADING OF EARL MAGNUS.


THE worthy Earl Magnus was as cheerful as if he were invited to a
banquet, and spoke neither words of offence nor anger. After these words
had passed, he fell on his knees to pray, hiding his face in his hands,
and shedding many tears before God. Then, when the holy Earl Magnus was
thus doomed to death, Hákon ordered his banner-bearer, Ofeig, to slay
the Earl, but he refused, with the utmost wrath. Then forced he Lífólf,
his cook, to be the slayer of Magnus, but he began to weep aloud. “Weep
not thus,” said Earl Magnus, “for this is an honourable task. Be firm,
and you shall have my clothing, according to the custom and laws of the
men of old. Be not afraid, for you do this against your will, and he who
forces you sins more than you.”

When he had said this, he took off his tunic and gave it to Lífólf. Then
he asked for permission to pray, which was granted to him. He fell upon
the earth, and gave himself to God, offering himself as a sacrifice. He
prayed not only for his friends, but also for his enemies and murderers,
and forgave them, with all his heart, their offences against himself. He
confessed his sins to God, and prayed that they might be washed from him
in the shedding of his blood. He commended his spirit to God’s keeping,
and prayed that His angels might come to meet his soul and carry it into
the rest of paradise. Some say that he took the sacrament when the mass
was sung. Then, when God’s friend was led to execution, he said to
Lífólf: “Stand before me, and hew me a mighty stroke on the head, for it
is not fitting that high-born lords should be put to death like thieves.
Be firm, poor man, for I have prayed to God for you, that he may have
mercy upon you.” After that he signed the sign of the cross, and stooped
under the blow, and his spirit passed into heaven.




                               CHAPTER XL

              THE SAINTSHIP OF EARL MAGNUS MADE MANIFEST.


THE place where Earl Magnus was slain was previously covered with moss
and stones, but shortly afterwards his merits before God became manifest
in this wise, that it became green sward where he was beheaded. Thus God
showed that he had suffered for righteousness’ sake, and had obtained
the beauty and verdure of paradise, which is called the land of the
living.

Earl Hákon did not permit his body to be brought to the church (for
burial).

The day of Earl Magnus’s death was two days after Tiburtiusmas (14th
April). Then he had been seven winters Earl in the Orkneys along with
Earl Hákon. Seventy-four winters had passed since the death of King
Olaf. The Kings of Norway were at this time Sigurd, Eystein, and Olaf.
It was one thousand and ninety-one winters after the birth of
Christ.[302]




                              CHAPTER XLI

                   THE EARL’S BODY BROUGHT TO CHURCH.


THORA, the mother of Earl Magnus, had invited both the Earls to a
banquet after their meeting, and Earl Hákon went there after the murder
of the holy Earl Magnus. Thóra herself served at the banquet, and
brought the drink to the Earl and his men who had been present at the
murder of her son. And when the drink began to have effect on the Earl,
then went Thóra before him and said: “You came alone here, my lord, but
I expected you both. Now, I hope you will gladden me in the sight of God
and men. Be to me in stead of a son, and I shall be to you in stead of a
mother. I stand greatly in need of your mercy now, and (I pray you to)
permit me to bring my son to church. Hear this my supplication now, as
you wish God to look upon you at the day of doom.”

The Earl became silent, and considered her case, as she prayed so
meekly, and with tears, that her son might be brought to church. He
looked upon her, and the tears fell, and he said, “Bury your son where
it pleases you.”

Then the Earl’s body was brought to Hrossey, and buried at Christ’s Kirk
(in Birsay), which had been built by Earl Thorfinn.




                              CHAPTER LXII

               THE MIRACLE-WORKING OF MAGNUS THE MARTYR.


SOON after this a heavenly light was seen above his burial-place. Then
men who were placed in danger began to pray to him, and their prayers
were heard. A heavenly odour was frequently perceived above his
burial-place, from which people suffering from illness received health.
Then sufferers made pilgrimages thither both from the Orkneys and
Hjaltland, and kept vigils at his grave, and were cured of all their
sufferings.[303] But people dared not make this known while Earl Hákon
was alive.

It is said of the men who were most guilty in the murder of the holy
Earl Magnus that most of them met with a miserable death.




                             CHAPTER XLIII

       THE MIRACLES WROUGHT BY THE BLESSED FRIEND OF GOD, MAGNUS.


William was Bishop of the Orkneys at this time. He was the first bishop
there. The bishop’s seat was at Christ’s Kirk in Birgishérad (Birsay).
William was bishop for six winters of the seventh decade.[304] For a
long time he disbelieved in the sanctity of Earl Magnus, until his
merits became manifest to such a degree that God made his holiness grow
the more conspicuous the more it was tried, as is told in the book of
his miracles.




                              CHAPTER XLIV

                THE JOURNEY OF EARL HAKON TO THE SOUTH.


AFTER the murder of Earl Magnus, Hákon, Paul’s son, took possession of
all the Orkneys, and exacted an oath of fealty from all men, and took
submission from those who had served Earl Magnus. He became a great
chief, and made heavy exactions from those of Earl Magnus’s friends who
in his opinion had taken part against him.

Some winters after this he prepared to leave the country, and went to
Rome. Then he also went to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the
palmers, and brought away sacred relics, and bathed in the river Jordan.
After that he returned to his dominions, and resumed the government of
the Orkneys. He became a good ruler, and established peace throughout
his dominions; he also made new laws for the Orkneys, which the
landowners liked better than the former ones. Then he became so popular
that the Orkneymen desired no other rulers than Hákon and his issue.




                              CHAPTER XLV

                             GENEALOGICAL.


WHEN Earl Hákon ruled over the Orkneys there lived a noble and wealthy
man, by name Moddan, at Dal (Dale), in Caithness. His daughters were
Helga and Frákork Thórleif. Helga, Moddan’s daughter, was the concubine
of Earl Hákon, and their son was Harald, who was called Sléttmáli
(smooth-talker), and their daughter was Ingibiorg, who was married to
Olaf Bitling (little bit), the King of the Sudreyar. Their second
daughter was Margarét. Moddan’s daughter, Frákork, was married to a man
who was named Liót Níding (miscreant), in Sutherland, and their daughter
was Steinvör the Stout, who was married to Thorliót, at Rekavík.[305]
Their sons were Olvir Rosta (strife), Magnus Orm, and Moddan Eindridi,
and their daughter Audhild. A second daughter of Frákork was Gudrún,
married to Thorstein Höld, Fiaransmunn (open-mouth). Their son was
Thorbiörn Klerk (clerk).

Hákon, Paul’s son, had a son named Paul, who was called Umálgi
(speechless); he was a reserved man, but popular. When the brothers grew
up they never agreed. Hákon, Paul’s son, died on a sick-bed in the
Islands, and his death was considered a great loss, for in the later
days of his reign there was unbroken peace, and the Islanders suspected
that the brothers would not agree well.




                              CHAPTER XLVI

                     THE SLAYING OF THORKEL FÓSTRI.


AFTER the death of Earl Hákon, his sons succeeded him; but they soon
disagreed, and divided the dominions between them. Then also dissensions
arose between the great men, and the vassals of each were divided into
factions. Earl Harald held Caithness from the King of the Scots, and he
resided frequently there, but sometimes also in Scotland (Sutherland?),
for he had many friends and kinsmen there.

When Earl Harald was staying in Sutherland there came to him a man
called Sigurd Slembir,[306] who was said to be the son of the priest
Adalbrekt. He came from Scotland, having been staying with King David,
who had held him in high esteem. Earl Harald received him extremely
well. Sigurd went into the Islands with Earl Harald and Frákork,
Moddan’s daughter, for her husband, Liót Níding, was dead. She and her
sister took a large share in the government with Earl Harald. Sigurd
Slembir was a great favourite with all of them. At that time Audhild,
the daughter of Thórleif, Moddan’s daughter, was his concubine.
Afterwards she was married to Hákon Kló (claw). Before that time she had
been married to Eirík Stræta; their son was Eirík Slagbrellir.

When Sigurd and Frákork came to the Islands great dissensions arose, and
both of the Earls called together as many of their friends as they could
get. The most attached to Earl Paul was Sigurd, at Westness,[307] who
had married Ingibiorg the Noble, a kinswoman of the Earls’, and Thorkel,
Sumarlidi’s son, who was always with Earl Paul, and was called his
foster-father. He was a kinsman of the holy Earl Magnus, and a most
popular man. The friends of the Earl thought that no man would less
deplore their dissensions than Thorkel, because of the injury done him
by their father Hákon. At last Earl Harald and Sigurd Slembir went to
Thorkel Fóstri,[308] and slew him. When Earl Paul heard this, he was
very much displeased, and gathered men together; but when their mutual
friends became aware of this, they went between them and tried to
reconcile them; and all took part in making peace. Earl Paul was so
wroth that he would not make peace, unless all those who were concerned
in the manslaying were banished. But as the islanders thought their
dissensions a great calamity, they all tried to pacify them; and the
result was that Sigurd and all those who, in Earl Paul’s opinion, were
most concerned in this crime, were banished from the Orkneys. Earl
Harald paid the manbote (compensation) for the slaughter of Thorkel. The
terms of this peace were that their friendship should be confirmed, and
that they should spend Christmas and all the chief festivals together.

Sigurd Slembir left the Orkneys, and went to Scotland, and stayed for a
while with Malcolm, King of Scots, and was well entertained. He was
thought a great man in all manly exercises. He remained for a time in
Scotland, until he went to Jerusalem.




                             CHAPTER XLVII

                     EARL HARALD SLAIN BY SORCERY.


ONCE the brothers were to be entertained at Orfjara (Orphir), one of
Earl Harald’s estates, and he was to bear the expense of the
entertainment for both of them that Christmas. He was very busy, and
made great preparations. The sisters Frákork and Helga were there with
the Earl, and sat sewing in a little room.[309] Earl Harald went into
the room where the sisters were sitting on a cross-bench, and saw a
linen garment, newly made, and white as snow, lying between them. The
Earl took it up, and saw that it was embroidered with gold. He asked,
“To whom does this splendid thing belong?”

Frákork replied, “It is intended for your brother Paul.”

“Why do you make such a fine garment for him? You do not take such pains
in making my clothing.”

He had just come out of bed, and was dressed in a shirt and linen
drawers, and had thrown a mantle over his shoulders. He threw off the
mantle, and spread out the dress. His mother took hold of it, and asked
him not to envy his brother of his fine clothing. The Earl pulled it
from her, and prepared to put it on. Then Frákork snatched off her
head-gear, and tore her hair, and said that his life was at stake if he
put it on, and both of the women wept grievously. The Earl put on the
garment nevertheless; but as soon as it touched his sides a shiver went
through his body, which was soon followed by great pain, so that he had
to take to his bed; and he was not long in bed until he died. His
friends considered his death a great loss.

Immediately after his death his brother Paul took possession of his
dominions, with the consent of the Bœndr. Earl Paul considered that the
splendid underclothing which Earl Harald had put on had been intended
for him, and therefore he did not like the sisters to stay in the
Orkneys. So they left the Islands with all their attendants, and went
first to Caithness, and then to Scotland to the estate which Frákork had
there. Her son Erlend was brought up there while he was young. Olvir
Rosta, the son of Thorliót, from Rekavík (Rackwick), and Steinný
(Steinvor?), Frákork’s daughter, were also brought up there. Olvir was a
man of great strength, a violent man and a great fighter. Thorbiörn
Klerk, the son of Thorstein Höld, was brought up there, and also
Margarét, the daughter of Earl Hákon and Helga, Moddan’s daughter, and
Eirík Slagbrellir. All these were men of great families, and
accomplished, and thought they had claims to the Orkneys. The brothers
of Frákork were Magnus Orfi (the liberal) and Earl Ottar, in Thórsey
(Thurso), who was a noble man.




                             CHAPTER XLVIII

                             OF EARL PAUL.


EARL PAUL then ruled the Orkneys, and was very popular. He was somewhat
taciturn, spoke little at the Things, and gave others a large share in
the government with himself. He was a modest man, and gentle to the
people, liberal with his money, and spared nothing with his friends. He
was not warlike, and kept himself very quiet. At that time there were
many noble men descended from Earls in the Orkneys. Then there lived at
Westness, in Hrólfsey (Rousay), a noble man, by name Sigurd, who had
married Ingibiorg the Noble. Her mother Herborg was the daughter of Earl
Paul, Thorfinn’s son. Their sons were Brynjúlf and Hákon Pík (peak). All
these were Earl Paul’s vassals; so were also the sons of Hávard, Gunni’s
son—Hákon Kló, Thorstein, and Dûfniáll. Their mother was Bergliót, and
her mother was Ragnhild, the daughter of Earl Paul. There was a man
named Erling, who lived in Caithness. He had four sons, all of them
accomplished men. A man named Olaf lived in Gáreksey (Gairsay), and had
another estate at Dungalsbæ, in Caithness. Olaf was a great man, and
highly honoured by Earl Paul. His wife was named Asleif, a wise woman,
accomplished, and of a great family. Their sons—Valthióf, Swein, and
Gunni—were all accomplished men. Their sister was named Ingigerd.
Sigurd, the Earl’s brother-in-law, had married Thóra, the mother of Earl
Magnus, and their son was Hákon Karl (man). Both Sigurd and his son were
great chiefs. In Rínarsey (North Ronaldsay) there lived a woman, by name
Ragna, and her son was named Thorstein, a man of great strength. A
farmer named Kugi, a wise and wealthy man, lived at Gefsisness,[310] in
Westrey. A farmer named Helgi lived at a hamlet in Westrey. Thorkel
Flétta (a braid), a violent and powerful man, lived in Westrey.
Thorstein and Haflidi were unpopular men. At Swiney (Swona), in the
Pentland Firth, lived a poor man, and his sons were Asbiörn and Margad,
sturdy fellows. In Fridarey (Fair Isle) lived a man by name Dagfinn. A
man named Thorstein lived at Fluguness,[311] in Hrossey (the Mainland of
Orkney), and his sons were Thorstein Krôkauga (crooked eye) and Blán,
both of them wild fellows. Játvör, the daughter of Earl Erlend, and her
son Borgar, lived at Knarrarstadir;[312] they were rather unpopular. Jón
Vœng (wing) lived at Uppland, in Háey (Hoy). Rikgard lived at
Brekkur,[313] in Straumsey. They were poor men, and relatives of Olaf
Hrólfsson. A man named Grímkell lived at Glettuness.[314] All these men
will be mentioned in the saga afterwards.




                              CHAPTER XLIX

                OF KALI, WHO AFTERWARDS BECAME AN EARL.


KOL, who was a very wise man, resided on his estates at Agdir (in
Norway), and did not go to the Orkneys. His son Kali grew up there, and
was a most promising man. He was of middle size, well proportioned, and
very handsomely shaped; his hair was of a light auburn colour. He was
very affable and popular, and highly accomplished. He made the following
verses:—

                   At the game-board I am skilful;
                   Knowing in no less than nine arts;
                   Runic lore I well remember;
                   Books I like; with tools I’m handy;
                   Expert am I on the snow-shoes,
                   With the bow, and pull an oar well;
                   And, besides, I am an adept
                   At the harp, and making verses.

Kali was frequently with his kinsman Sölmund, the son of Sigurd Sneis.
He was treasurer at Túnsberg, and had estates at Austragdir. He was a
great chief, and had a numerous retinue.




                               CHAPTER L

                        OF KALI AND GILLICHRIST.


WHEN Kali was fifteen winters old, he went with some merchants to
England, taking with him a good (cargo of) merchandise. They went to a
trading place called Grímsbœ (Grimsby). There was a great number of
people from Norway, as well as from the Orkneys, Scotland, and the
Sudreyar. Kali met there a man who was called Gillichrist. The latter
asked Kali about many things in Norway, and spoke chiefly with him, so
that they became companions. Then he told Kali in confidence that his
name was Harald,[315] that Magnus Barelegs was his father, and his
mother was in the Sudreyar. He further asked him how he would be
received in Norway if he came there. Kali said that he thought King
Sigurd would be likely to receive him well, if others did not set him
against him. Gillichrist and Kali exchanged presents, and at parting
they promised each other mutual friendship wherever they might meet.




                               CHAPTER LI

                            OF KALI AND JON.


AFTER that Kali went from the west in the same ship. They touched at
Agdir, and from there they went to Biörgvin (Bergen). Then he made a
stanza:—

                   Unpleasantly we have been wading
                   In the mud a weary five weeks.
                   Dirt we had indeed in plenty,
                   While we lay in Grimsby harbour;
                   But now on the moor of sea-gulls
                   Ride we o’er the crests of billows,
                   Gaily as the elk of bowsprits
                   Eastward ploughs its way to Bergen.

When they came to the town, there was a great number of people from the
north and the south (of Norway), and from foreign lands, who had brought
much merchandise. The crew of the ship went to some public places to
amuse themselves. Kali was a great dandy, and made a great display, as
he was newly arrived from England. He thought a great deal of himself,
and many others thought a great deal of him too, because he was of a
good family, and highly accomplished. In the inn where he sat drinking
there was a man named Jón Pétrsson, the son of Serk, from Sogn. He was
the king’s vassal at the time. His mother was Helga, the daughter of
Hárek, from Setr. Jón was a great dandy too. The dame who kept the inn
where they were drinking was Unn by name, a woman of good repute. Jón
and Kali soon became companions, and parted great friends. Whereupon Jón
went home to his estates, and Kali went to his father, Kol, at Agdir.
Kali stayed frequently with his kinsman Sölmund. Thus some years passed,
in which Kali made trading trips during the summer, and spent the
winters at home or with Sölmund.




                              CHAPTER LII

                       KALI GOES INTO DOLLS CAVE.


ONE summer Kali went to Thrándheim; he was detained by weather in an
island called Dolls, and there was a cave called Dollshellir. It was
said that money was hidden there. The merchants went into the cave, and
found it very difficult to penetrate into it. They came to a sheet of
water stretching across the cave, and no one dared to cross it except
Kali, and one of Sölmund’s domestics called Hávard. They swam across the
lake, having a rope between them. Kali also carried firewood and
fire-making gear between his shoulders. They came to the opposite shore,
which was rugged and stony; the smell also was there very bad, so that
they could hardly make a light. Kali said they should not go any
farther, and piled up stones as a monument. Then Kali sang a song:

                 Here I raise a mighty stone-pile,
                 In remembrance of our daring,
                 In this Dolls cave, dark and gloomy,
                 Where we sought the goblins’ treasure.
                 Yet I know not how the captain
                 Of the ocean’s gliding snow-skates
                 May re-cross the dismal water:
                 Long and dreary is the journey.

Then they returned, and came safe to their men, and it is not mentioned
that anything else happened during their journey. When they came to
Biörgvin, Kali went to the same inn, to Dame Unn. Jón Pétrsson was
there, and one of his domestics, by name Brynjúlf. Many other men were
also there, although their names are not mentioned here.




                              CHAPTER LIII

                        OF HAVARD AND BRYNJULF.


ONE evening, when Jón and Kali had gone to bed, many remained drinking,
and talked a great deal. The guests were getting drunk, and at last they
began comparing men,[316] and disputing about who were the greatest of
the landed men of Norway. Brynjúlf said that Jón Pétrsson was the best
man, and of the noblest family of all the young men south of Stád.
Hávard, the companion of Kali, spoke of Sölmund, and said that he was in
nothing inferior to Jón, adding that the men of Vík would esteem him
more than Jón. Out of this a great quarrel arose, and as the ale spoke
in them, they kept so little within bounds that Hávard jumped up, took a
piece of wood, and struck Brynjúlf a blow on the head, so that he
fainted. Those present took hold of Brynjúlf, and sent Hávard away to
Kali, who again sent him to a priest called Rikgard, in Alvidra. “And
tell him from me,” said Kali, “to keep you till I come to the east.”
Kali sent a man with him, and they rowed to the south till they came to
Grœningiasund. Then Hávard said to his fellow-traveller: “Now, as we are
out of their reach, let us rest ourselves, and lie down to sleep.”

When Brynjúlf recovered, he was conducted to Jón, and he told him all
that had happened, and also that the man had been sent away. Jón guessed
the truth about Hávard’s destination, and ordered ten men, led by
Brynjúlf, to take a rowing boat, in which they rowed till they came to
Grœningiasund, and by that time it was daylight. They saw a boat on the
beach. Brynjúlf said: “Perhaps these men may be able to tell us
something of Hávard.” Then they went up and found them when they had
just woke up. Brynjúlf and his men attacked them immediately with arms,
and Hávard and his companion were both slain. After this they returned
to the town and told the news to Jón, and then it was known to the whole
town.

Kali considered these slaughters a great offence against himself; and
when mediators went between him and Jón, the latter said that he would
leave to him to say what amends he wished for the offence, without
prejudice to the right of the King and the parties to the suit. Kali
agreed to this, yet they were no friends from this time. Kali went home
after this occurrence, and when he saw his father he told him the news
and the result.

Then Kol said: “I think your judgment was rather strange, in that you
should have agreed to any terms of reconciliation before Sölmund knew. I
think your position is difficult, and that you can do little else than
try to be reconciled. But Sölmund would not have acted like you if your
man had been killed.”

Kali replied: “I suppose it is true, father, that I have judged rather
hastily in this matter, and you were too far away to advise me. It will
often appear that I am not so deeply wise as you. But I thought that
Sölmund had not a better chance of gaining honourable amends, though I
refused what was offered to me. And I consider it no dishonour for you
and Sölmund if he offers to allow you to determine your compensation,
though I doubt whether such an offer will be made. But I consider myself
under no obligation to Brynjúlf, while I have made no award and no money
has been received.”

Father and son had a long talk about this, and did not agree; then they
sent men to tell Sölmund the news.




                              CHAPTER LIV

                          OF JON AND SOLMUND.


AFTER that, Kol and Kali had an interview with Sölmund. Kol wished to
send men to Jón to try to make peace between them; but Sölmund and
Hallvard, Hávard’s brother, refused everything but blood-revenge, and
said it was not becoming to ask for settlement. Yet Kol’s advice was
taken, because he promised not to withdraw from the case until Sölmund
had received honourable amends; and Kol was to lay all the plans. When
the messengers returned, they said they had received a most unfavourable
reply to their demands, and that Jón refused positively to make
compensation for a man who by his own act had forfeited his personal
security. Sölmund said that this had turned out just as he
expected—namely, that little honour would be gained by asking Jón for
settlement; and then he begged Kol to propose a plan that might be of
some avail.

Kol replied: “Is Hallvard willing to run any risk in order to avenge his
brother, even though it may come to little?”

Hallvard said he would not spare himself in order to take revenge, even
if there were danger connected with it.

“Then,” said Kol, “you shall go secretly to Sogn, to a man called Uni,
who lives not far from Jón. He is a wise man, but rather poor, for he
has been a long time oppressed by Jón; he is a great friend of mine, and
considerably advanced in years. You shall take to him from me six marks
(of silver) weighed, in order that he may give you advice how to take
revenge on Brynjúlf, or some other of Jón’s men, whom he considers not
less a loss to him. And if this can be brought about, Uni shall send you
to my kinsman Kyrpinga Orm, at Studla, and his sons Ogmund and Erling,
and there I consider you will be as if you were at home. Tell Uni to
sell his farm and come to me.”

Hallvard prepared to go, and we are not told of his journey or night
quarters, until he came to Uni one evening. He did not tell his true
name. They inquired of each other for current news; and in the evening,
when they were sitting round the fire, the guest asked a great deal
about noble men in Sogn and Hördaland. Uni said that none of the landed
men were considered more powerful than Jón, on account of his family and
his violence; and he further asked whether they had no experience of it
in the south. When he had said this, the guest became silent. Then the
people arose from the fire, and the two remained.

Then Uni said: “Did not you say just now that your name was Hallvard?”

“No,” said the guest; “I called myself Saxi this evening.”

Uni said: “Then I am out of all difficulties; but if my name were
Brynjúlf, I should think yours was Hallvard; and now let us go to
sleep.”

The guest took hold of him and said: “Let us not go yet.” Whereupon he
delivered the purse, and said: “Kol sends you his greeting and this
silver, in order that you may be willing to advise me how to avenge my
brother Havard on Brynjúlf.” Then he told him Kol’s plans.

Uni said: “Kol deserves well of me, but I cannot know what may be done
about the revenge on Brynjúlf; but he is expected here to-morrow to
fetch his concubine’s clothes.”

Thereafter he went with Hallvard to a stable which stood opposite the
door of the house, and concealed him in the manger. This was before the
people got up, but he had slept in the house during the night. When
Hallvard had been a little while in the stable, he saw a brisk man
coming to the house. He called into the house, and told the woman to
make herself ready. She took her clothes and brought them out. Then
Hallvard thought he knew who the man was, and walked out. Brynjúlf had
put down his weapons while he was tying the clothes; and when Hallvard
met him he dealt him a deadly blow, and returned to the stable and hid
himself. While the slaughter was being committed the woman had gone into
the house to take leave of the inmates, but when she came out she saw
what had occurred, and ran in crying and frightened to such a degree
that she was nearly fainting, and told the news. Farmer Uni ran out, and
said that the man had probably been an assassin. He despatched a man to
tell Jón the news, and urged his men with great eagerness to search for
the murderer; therefore no one suspected him. Hallvard remained in the
stable until the search had slackened. Then he went, with Uni’s advice,
to Orm and his sons at Studla, and they sent men with him to the east.
Kol and Sölmund received him well, and were then well satisfied with
their case. After a while the truth came out, and Jón was very much
grieved. Thus that year passed.

Next winter, towards Yuletide, Jón left his home with thirty men, saying
that he was going to pay his uncle Olaf a visit. This he did, and was
very well received. Jón told his uncle that he was going to Agdir to see
Sölmund. Olaf dissuaded him from it, and said that he had held his own
though they parted as matters stood then. But Jón said he was not
satisfied to let Brynjúlf remain unavenged. Olaf said he thought he
would gain very little by trying; yet he had from there thirty men, and
thus he went with half a hundred men across the hills, intending to take
Sölmund and Kol by surprise. When Jón had just gone from the north, Uni
went in haste to Orm and his sons at Studla, and they sent men with him
to Kol. He arrived there at Yule, and told them that Jón was going to
attack them. Kol despatched scouts immediately to all parts where Jón
was expected; and he himself went to see Sölmund, and they and their
kinsmen waited with a great number of men about them. They had news of
Jón’s movements, and started immediately to meet him. They met at a
certain wood, and the fight began immediately. Kol’s men were much more
numerous, and came off victorious. Jón lost many men, and fled into the
wood. He was wounded in the leg, and this wound healed so badly that he
was lame ever after, and was called Jón Fót (leg). He came to the north
during Lent, and his expedition was considered rather ignominious. The
winter thus passed, but the next summer Jón caused two of Kol’s kinsmen
to be killed, Gunnar and Aslák.




                               CHAPTER LV

                  THE RECONCILIATION OF THE ORKNEYMEN.


SHORTLY afterwards King Sigurd came to the town, and these difficulties
were laid before him. Then the King summoned both to appear before him,
and they came accompanied by their kinsmen and friends. An attempt was
made to reconcile them, and the result was, that the King should judge
all their differences, which both parties confirmed by shaking of hands.
King Sigurd, assisted by the advice of the wisest men, then made peace
between them. One part of the agreement was, that Jón Pétrsson should
marry Ingirid, Kol’s daughter, and their friendship should be confirmed
by the connection. The killed were set off against each other. The
attack on Kol, and Jón’s wound, were set off against the loss of men in
the east. Further wounds were matched, and the difference made up. Each
should assist the other, both at home and abroad. As a result of this
reconciliation, King Sigurd gave Kali, Kol’s son, the half of the
Orkneys, jointly with Paul, Hákon’s son, and made him an Earl at the
same time. He also gave him the name of Earl Rögnvald, Brúsi’s son,
because his mother, Gunnhild, said that Rögnvald was the most
accomplished of all the Orkney Earls, and thought the name would bring
good fortune. This part of the Orkneys had belonged to Earl Magnus,
Kali’s mother’s brother. After this reconciliation, they who were
enemies before parted good friends.




                              CHAPTER LVI

                          KING SIGURD’S DEATH.


THIS winter King Sigurd resided in Osló.[317] During Lent he was taken
ill, and died one night after Lady-day. His son Magnus was in the town,
and held a Thing, and was accepted king throughout the land, agreeably
to the oaths which the inhabitants had sworn to King Sigurd. He also
took possession of all the royal treasures.

Harald Gilli was at Túnsberg when he heard of the death of King Sigurd.
He had meetings with his friends, and sent for Rögnvald and his father,
because they had always been friends since they met in England. Rögnvald
and his father had also done most to help Harald to prove his paternity
to Sigurd. In this they were assisted by many barons; among others
Ingimar, Swein’s son, and Thióstólf, Ali’s son. Harald and his party
resolved to hold the Hauga-Thing[318] at Túnsberg, and there Harald was
accepted king of one-half of the land. The oaths with which he had given
up his patrimony in order to be permitted to prove his paternity by an
ordeal[319] were said to have been given under compulsion. Then people
flocked to him, and gave in their allegiance, and soon he had many men
about him.

Messages went between him and King Magnus, but it was not until four
winters had passed that they were reconciled, on the terms that each of
them should have one-half of the kingdom; but King Magnus had the long
ships, and the table-service, and all the treasures (of his father), yet
he was dissatisfied with his portion, and showed enmity to all the
friends of King Harald. King Magnus would not hold valid King Sigurd’s
gift of the Orkneys and the earldom to Rögnvald, because he was the
firmest partisan of King Harald, until all their dealings were
concluded. Magnus and Harald were three winters Kings of Norway, and
nominally at peace, but the fourth summer they fought at Fyrileif,[320]
where King Magnus had nearly 6000, but Harald only 1500 men. These
chiefs were with King Harald: his brother Kriströd, Earl Rögnvald,
Ingimar from Ask, Thióstólf Ali’s son, and Sölmund. King Magnus gained
the victory, and Harald fled. Kriströd and Ingimar were killed. Ingimar
made the following stanza:—

                   Fiends me drove to Fyrileif;[321]
                   Not with my will did I fight there.
                   Bit by arrows from the elmbow,
                   Ne’er to Ask shall I return.

King Harald fled to his ships in Vík,[322] and went to Denmark to King
Eirik Eymuni,[323] who gave him Halland for his maintenance, and eight
long ships without rigging. Thióstólf, Ali’s son, sold his lands, bought
ships and arms, and went in autumn to King Harald, in Denmark. At
Yuletide King Harald came to Biörgvin, and lay in Flóruvagár till after
Yule. Then they attacked the town, and met with little resistance. King
Magnus was seized on board his own ship, and maimed. King Harald then
took possession of the whole kingdom, and the next spring he renewed the
gift of the Islands and the title of Earl to Rögnvald.




                              CHAPTER LVII

                             KOL’S SCHEMES.


KOL resolved to send men to the Orkneys to ask Earl Paul to give up half
the Islands which King Harald had given to Rögnvald, and they should be
friends and good kinsmen. But if Earl Paul refused, the same men should
go to Frákork and Olvir Rosta, and offer them one-half of the land,
jointly with Earl Rögnvald, if they were willing to take it from Earl
Paul by force of arms. When they came to Earl Paul in the Orkneys, and
delivered the message, he replied: “I understand this claim; it has been
planned advisedly, and with long forethought; they sought the help of
the Kings of Norway to obtain my possessions. Now, I will not repay this
perfidy by giving away my possessions to a man who is not nearer to me
than Rögnvald is, and refusing them to my brother’s son or sister’s son.
There is no need to talk any more of this, for with the assistance of my
friends and kinsmen I shall defend the Orkneys as long as God grants me
life.”

Then the messengers saw what would be the result of their message to
Earl Paul, and went away across the Pentland Firth to Caithness, and
south into the country to Frákork, and delivered their message, to the
effect that Kol and Rögnvald offered her and Olvir half the Islands if
they were willing to conquer them from Earl Paul.

Frákork replied: “It is true that Kol is a very clever man, and it was
wisely planned to seek assistance here, as we have a great many
relatives and connections. I have now married Margaret, Hákon’s
daughter, to Moddan, Earl of Atjöklar (Athole), who is of the noblest
family of all the Scottish chiefs. His father, Malcolm, is the brother
(uncle?) of King Malcolm, the father of David, who is now King of Scots.
We have many and just claims on the Orkneys. We ourselves have also some
power. We are said also to be rather far-seeing, and during hostilities
all things do not come on us unawares; yet we will be glad to enter into
alliance with Kol and his son for many reasons. Tell them from me that I
and Olvir shall bring an army to the Orkneys against Earl Paul about the
middle of the next summer. Let Earl Rögnvald meet us then, and come to a
decisive battle with Earl Paul; and I will collect forces together
during the winter from my kinsmen, friends, and connections in Scotland
and the Sudreyar (Hebrides).”

The messengers returned to Norway, and related how matters stood. Next
winter Earl Rögnvald prepared to go west, and the chiefs Sölmund and Jón
with him. They went the next summer, and had a fine body of troops,
though not numerous, and five or six ships. They arrived at Hjaltland
(Shetland) about the middle of the summer, but heard nothing of Frákork.
Strong and contrary winds sprung up, and they brought their ships to
Alasund,[324] and went a-feasting over the country, for the Bœndr
received them well.

But of Frákork it is to be told that in the spring she went to the
Sudreyar, where she and Olvir gathered troops and ships together. They
got twelve ships, all of them small and somewhat badly manned; and about
the middle of the summer they directed their course to the Orkneys,
intending to meet Earl Rögnvald, according to their agreement. The wind
was rather unfavourable. Olvir Rosta was the commander of these troops,
and he was to obtain an earldom in the Orkneys if they gained the
victory. Frákork was there also with many of her retainers.




                             CHAPTER LVIII

              THE FIGHT BETWEEN EARL PAUL AND OLVIR ROSTA.


EARL PAUL was then at a feast with Sigurd at Westness, in Hrólfsey
(Rousay), and when he heard that Earl Rögnvald had arrived in Hjaltland,
and at the same time that an army which was going to attack him was
gathering in the Sudreyar, he sent word to Kugi, in Westrey, and Thorkel
Flettir, who were wise men, and many others of his chief men he called
together. At this meeting Earl Paul sought advice from his friends, but
they differed in their opinions. Some wished him to share his
possessions with one of the two parties, so as not to have both as
enemies. Others advised him to go over to his friends in Ness
(Caithness), and see what assistance he could get there.

Earl Paul replied, “I will not offer them my possessions now, since I
refused peremptorily when they asked civilly. Besides, I think it would
be unworthy of a chief to flee from my lands without a trial of
strength. My counsel is to send men to-night to collect troops
throughout all the Islands. Let us then go to meet Earl Rögnvald, and
have matters decided between us before the Sudreymen come.” Earl Paul’s
plan was adopted.

With Earl Paul there was a man by name Swein, called Brióstreip
(breast-rope), who was his henchman, and highly esteemed by him. In the
summer he was always on viking-raids, but in the winter [he stayed] with
the Earl. Swein was a man of large stature and great strength, swarthy
and ill-favoured. He was greatly skilled in ancient lore, and had
frequently been engaged in outsittings.[325] His place was in the
forecastle of the Earl’s ship.

During the night the following chiefs came to Earl Paul:—Eyvind,
Melbrigdi’s son, in a ship fully manned; Olaf, Rólf’s son, from Gáreksey
(Gairsay), had another; Thorkel Flettir the third; Sigurd the fourth;
and the Earl himself the fifth. With these five vessels they went to
Hrólfsey (Rousay), and arrived there in the evening about sunset. Troops
gathered to him during the night, but more ships were not to be had. The
next day they were going to sail to Hjaltland to meet Earl Rögnvald; but
in the morning, shortly after sunrise, some men came to Earl Paul, who
said they had seen longships coming from the Pentland Firth; whether ten
or twelve they did not know. The Earl and his men were convinced that
this was Frákork’s party, and the Earl ordered his men to row against
them as fast as possible. Olaf and Sigurd advised them to go leisurely,
saying that their troops might arrive at any moment.

When they were east of Tannskáruness (Tankerness), the longships, twelve
together, sailed to the west from Múli.[326] The Earl and his men
fastened their ships together; then the Bondi, Erling from
Tannskáruness, and his sons, came to the Earl and offered him their
assistance; and then their ships were so crowded that they thought they
could not use more men. The Earl asked Erling and his men to bring
stones to them, until they were prevented by the fighting. When they had
prepared themselves, Olvir came up and made the attack with a superior
force, but his ships were smaller. Olvir (himself) had a large ship,
which he placed beside the Earl’s ship, and there was the severest
fighting. Olaf, Rólf’s son, attacked the smallest ships of Olvir, and
cleared three of them in a short time. Olvir attacked the Earl’s ships
so fiercely that all the forecastle men were driven abaft the mast. Then
Olvir urged his men strongly to board, and jumped himself from the
quarterdeck to the forepart of the ship, and was the first to board.

Swein Brióstreip was the foremost of all the Earl’s men, and fought
bravely. When the Earl saw that Olvir had boarded his ship, he urged his
men forward, and jumped himself from the quarterdeck to the forepart of
the ship. When Olvir perceived this, he grasped a spear, and hurled it
at the Earl, who received it with his shield, but fell down on the deck.
Then there was a great shout; but in the same moment Swein Brióstreip
seized a huge stone,[327] and threw it at Olvir. It hit him in the chest
with such force that he was thrown overboard, and sank; but his men were
able to drag him up into one of their ships, and it was not known
whether he was dead or alive. Then some cut the cables, and wanted to
flee. All Olvir’s men were also driven down off the Earl’s ship, and
began to withdraw. At that moment Olvir recovered, and asked them not to
flee; but all pretended not to hear what he said. The Earl pursued the
fugitives along the east of Hrossey and Rögnvaldsey, and into the
Pentland Firth, where they parted. Then he returned, and five of Olvir’s
ships remained where they had fought. The Earl took them, and manned
them with his troops. The battle took place on Friday, but in the night
the Earl had the ships made ready, and many troops and two longships
came to him, so that in the morning he had twelve ships all well manned.

On Saturday he sailed to Hjaltland, and took by surprise those that had
charge of Earl Rögnvald’s ships. He killed the men, and seized the ships
with all their contents. In the morning Earl Rögnvald had news of this,
and his men gathered together, and a great many of the Bœndr. Then they
went down to the beach, and challenged Earl Paul and his men to come on
shore and fight. Earl Paul did not put much faith in the Hjaltlanders,
and would not go on shore; but he told them to take ships, and then they
might fight. Earl Rögnvald saw, however, that they could get no ships in
Hjaltland, such as would give them any chance, and they parted thus as
matters stood. Earl Paul and his men went back to the Orkneys, but Earl
Rögnvald and his men remained in Hjaltland during the summer. In the
autumn they went back to Norway with some merchants, and it was thought
their expedition had come to a most ridiculous end.

When Earl Rögnvald came to the east, he saw his father Kol, who asked
him whether he was dissatisfied with his expedition. He replied that the
result had brought little honour to himself.

Kol replied: “I do not think so; I think a great deal has been done,
since the Hjaltlanders are your friends, and the journey was better than
staying at home.”

Rögnvald replied: “If you praise this journey, then you are either more
indifferent about my case than I thought, or you see something in it
which I do not perceive. I should wish very much to have your counsels,
and that you would go with us yourself.”

Kol replied: “I shall not do both—call everything easy for you, and come
nowhere near myself; but I think I shall hold fast to my own plans, so
that there is no prejudice to your honour.”

Rögnvald replied: “I will gladly follow your counsels.”

Kol replied: “First, I advise you to send word to King Harald and other
friends of yours, and ask them to give you men and ships to go to the
west in the spring; but during the winter we ourselves will collect all
the forces we can, and then try a second time whether we can gain
possession of the Islands, or find our graves there.”

“I have made up my mind,” said Earl Rögnvald, “not to make another
journey like that we made just now, and I think that most of us who went
are of the same mind.”




                              CHAPTER LIX

                         EARL RÖGNVALD’S PLANS.


EARL PAUL went back to the Orkneys, after having taken the ships of Earl
Rögnvald. He had gained a great victory, and feasted all his friends and
vassals.

It was now resolved to make a beacon in Fridarey (Fair Isle), which
should be lighted if enemies were seen coming from Hjaltland. Another
beacon was made in Rínarsey (North Ronaldsay), and others in some other
islands also, so that they might be seen all over the Islands.
Thorstein, the son of Hávard, Gunni’s son, was to have charge of that on
Rínarsey; his brother Magnus of the one in Sandey; Kugi of that in
Westrey; and Sigurd, at Westness, of the one in Rólfsey. Olaf, Rólf’s
son, went to Dungalsbæ, in Caithness, and was to have the emoluments of
that place. His son Valthióf lived at that time in Straumsey (Stroma).

Earl Paul gave presents to his men, and all promised him their unfailing
friendship. He had many men about him in the autumn, until he heard that
Rögnvald and his men had left Hjaltland. Nothing happened in the Islands
until Yule. Earl Paul had a grand Yule feast, which he prepared at his
estate in Jórfiara (Orphir), and invited many guests. Valthióf, Olaf’s
son, from Straumsey (Stroma), was invited. He went with his men in a
ten-oared boat, and they perished all of them in the West Firth on Yule
Eve. That was thought sad news, as Valthióf was a most accomplished man.
His father, Olaf, had a large party in Caithness. There were his sons
Swein and Gunni, and the sons of Grím of Swiney,[328] Asbiörn and
Margad, brave-looking fellows, who always followed Swein. Three nights
before Yule, Swein, Olaf’s son, Asbiörn, and Margad, had put out to
sea-fishing, and Asleif and her son, and Gunni, Olaf’s son, had gone a
short distance to visit their friends. The night after that Olvir Rosta
arrived at Dungalsbæ with the party that had been out with him on a
viking-raid during the summer. He surprised Olaf in the house, and set
it on fire immediately. There he was burnt with five others, but the
rest were permitted to escape. Olvir and his men took all the movable
property, and then went away.

After this Swein was called Asleif’s son. He came home on Yule Eve, and
went immediately out north, on the Pentland Firth. At midnight they came
to Grím, the father of Asbiörn and Margad, in Swefney (Swona); he went
into the boat to them, and they brought Swein to Knarrarstadir
(Knarstane), in Skálpeid (Scapa). A man, by name Arnkel, lived there.
His sons were Hánef and Sigurd. Grím and his sons returned, and Swein
gave him a finger-ring of gold. Hánef and Sigurd accompanied Swein to
Jórfiara (Orphir), where he was well received; and he was conducted to
his kinsman Eyvind Melbrigdi’s son. Eyvind conducted him to Earl Paul,
who received him well, and asked his news. He told him of his father’s
death, at which the Earl was much grieved, and said it had in a great
measure happened through him. He invited Swein to stay with him, and he
accepted the invitation with thinks.




                               CHAPTER LX

                           SWEIN SLAYS SWEIN.


THEN they went to evensong. There was a large homestead there (at
Orphir); it stood on the hill-side, and there was a height behind the
houses. From the top of the hill Aurridafiörd[329] may be seen on the
other side; in it lies Damisey. In this island there was a castle; the
keeper of it was a man by name Blán, the son of Thorstein, at
Flydruness.[330] In Jórfiara there was a large drinking-hall;[331] the
door was near the east gable on the southern wall, and a magnificent
church was in front of the door; and one had to go down to the church
from the hall. On entering the hall one saw a large flat stone[332] on
the left hand; farther in there were many large ale vessels; but
opposite the outer door was the stofa.

When the guests came from evensong, they were placed in their seats. The
Earl had Swein, Asleif’s son, next to him. On the other side, next to
the Earl, was Swein Brióstreip, and then Jón his kinsman. When the
tables were removed, there came in men with the tidings of Valthióf’s
drowning. This the Earl considered sad news. He said that no one should
tell it to Swein while the Yule feast lasted, adding that he had cares
enow already. In the evening, when they had finished drinking, the Earl
went to bed, and so did most of his guests. Swein Brióstreip went out
and sat out all night, as was his wont. In the night (at midnight?) the
guests arose and heard mass, and after high mass they sat down to the
table. Eyvind Melbrigdi’s son, shared the management of the feast with
the Earl, and did not sit down to the table. Table-boys and candle-boys
were standing before the Earl’s table,[333] but Eyvind handed
drinking-cups to each of the Sweins. Swein Brióstreip thought Eyvind
poured more into his cup than Swein, Asleif’s son’s, and that he took
the cup away from the latter before he had emptied it, so he called
Swein, Asleif’s son, a sluggard at his drink. There had long been a
coldness between Swein Brióstreip and Olaf, Hrólf’s son, and also
between him and Swein, Asleif’s son, since he grew up. When they had
been drinking for a while, the guests went to nones’ service. When they
came in again, memorial toasts[334] were proposed, and they drank out of
horns. Then Swein Brióstreip wished to exchange horns with his namesake,
saying his was a small one. Eyvind, however, put a big horn into Swein
Asleif’s son’s hand, and this he offered to his namesake. Then Swein
Brióstreip became angry, and was overheard by the Earl and some of the
men muttering to himself, “Swein will be the death of Swein, and Swein
shall be the death of Swein.” But nothing was said about it. The
drinking went on until evensong; and when the Earl went out, Swein,
Asleif’s son, walked before him; but Swein Brióstreip remained behind
drinking. When they came out to the ale-room, Eyvind followed them, and
craved a word alone with Swein, Asleif’s son.

He said, “Did you not hear what your namesake said when you offered him
the horn?”

“No,” he replied.

Then Eyvind repeated his words, and said that it was surely the devil
that had spoken through his mouth in the night. “He intends to kill
you,” he added, “but you should forestall him, and slay him.”

Eyvind put an axe into his hand, and told him to stand in the shadow
beside the flat stone; he should strike him in front if Jón preceded
him; but from behind if Jón followed him.

The Earl went to the church, and no one took heed of Eyvind and Swein;
but when Swein Brióstreip and Jón walked out shortly after, the latter
had a sword in his hand, as was his habit, though the others were
unarmed. Jón walked in front. Some light came through the outer door,
but outside the sky was cloudy. When Swein Brióstreip came into the
doorway, Swein, Asleif’s son, struck him on the forehead, so that he
stumbled, but did not fall; and when he regained his footing, he saw a
man in the door, and thought it was he who had wounded him. Then he drew
his sword, and struck at his head, splitting it down to the shoulders.
This, however, was Jón, his kinsman, and they fell there both. Eyvind
came up at the same moment, and led Swein, Asleif’s son, into the stofa,
opposite the door, and he was dragged out through a window. There
Magnus, Eyvind’s son, had a horse ready for him, and accompanied him
away behind the house, and into Aurrida Firth. There he took a boat, and
brought Swein to the castle in Damisey; and the next morning Blán
accompanied him to Bishop William, in Egilsey. When they arrived there
the Bishop was at mass, and after the mass Swein was conducted to him
secretly. Swein told the Bishop the news—the death of his father and
brother Valthióf, and the slaughter of Swein and Jón; then he besought
the Bishop’s assistance. The Bishop thanked him for the slaughter of
Swein Brióstreip, and said it was a good riddance.[335] He kept Swein,
Asleif’s son, during the Yule-tide, and after that he sent him to a man
called Höldbodi, Hundi’s son, in Tyrvist (Tiree), in the Sudreyar
(Hebrides). Höldbodi was a great chief, and received Swein very well,
and there he spent the winter highly esteemed of all the people.




                              CHAPTER LXI

                             OF EARL PAUL.


A SHORT time after the slaughters had been committed in Jórfiara, the
men ran from the church, and carried Swein into the house, for he was
not yet dead, but insensible, and he died during the night. The Earl
commanded every one to take his seat, as he wished to know for certain
who had committed the manslaughters. Then Swein, Asleif’s son, was
missed, and it was thought clear that he had done the deed.

Then Eyvind came and said that it was plainly seen that Swein Brióstreip
must have killed Jón.

The Earl said that no one should touch a hair of Swein Asleif’s son’s
head, as this had not been done without provocation. “But if he avoids
meeting with me,” he said, “he will harm himself by so doing.”

It was thought most probable that Swein had gone to Hákon Karl in
Papuli,[336] the brother of Earl Magnus the holy. He was a great chief,
a quiet man and moderate. The Earl did not hear of Swein that winter,
and then he outlawed him. In the spring the Earl visited many of the
northern islands, to collect his land-dues. He made great friends of the
chiefs, and bestowed presents with both hands. The Earl visited
Straumsey (Stroma), and gave Thorkel Flettir the farm which Valthióf
had, till such time as he should know where Swein was.

Thorkel said: “Here the saying does not prove true, that ‘the King has
many ears.’ Although you are an Earl, I think it strange that you have
not heard of Swein, for I knew immediately that Bishop William had sent
him to Höldbodi, Hundi’s son, in the Sudreyar, and there he has been all
winter.”

The Earl replied: “What shall I do with a Bishop who has acted thus?”

Thorkel replied: “The Bishop should not be blamed for this in critical
times like these; and you will need all your friends if Rögnvald and his
men come from the east.”

The Earl said that was true.

From Straumsey he went to Rínarsey, and received an entertainment from
Ragna and her son Thorstein. Ragna was a wise woman. They (she and her
son) had another farm in Papey. The Earl spent three nights there, as he
was prevented by weather from going to Kugi, in Westrey. The Earl and
Ragna spoke of many things.

She said to him: “There was no great loss in Swein Brióstreip, although
he was a brave warrior, for he brought on you the hatred of many. I
should therefore advise you, in presence of the difficulties that face
you, to make as many friends as possible, and be slow to resent
offences. I could wish that you would not attach blame to Bishop William
and other kinsmen of Swein, Asleif’s son, but rather take the Bishop
into favour, and send word to the Sudreyar after Swein to pardon him and
restore him his possessions, in order that he may be to you such as his
father was. It has long been the custom of the noblest men to do a great
deal for their friends, and thus to secure support and popularity.”

The Earl replied: “You are a wise woman, Ragna, but you have not yet
been made Earl of the Orkneys, and you shall not rule the land here. Is
it come to this, that I must give Swein money in order to be reconciled
to him, thinking that it would be to my advantage?” Then he became
wroth, and continued: “Let God decide between me and my kinsman
Rögnvald, and may He let it happen to each of us according to his deeds.
If I have offended against Rögnvald, I now make offer of reparation; but
if he will invade my dominions, I will think him my greatest friend who
assists me to defend them. I have never seen Rögnvald; and, so far from
having ever offended him with my knowledge, it is known that I had no
part in what my kinsmen did.”

Many replied that to try to deprive him of his possessions by force of
arms would be a most unprovoked assault; and no one spoke against this.

When the spring advanced, Earl Paul had beacons kept up in Fridarey
(Fair Isle) and Rínarsey (North Ronaldsay), and almost all the Islands,
so that each could be seen from the other. A man named Dagfinn,
Hlödver’s son, an active fellow who had a farm in Fridarey, was to keep
that beacon, and light it if an army were seen coming from Hjaltland.

Earl Rögnvald spent the winter at home at Agdir (in Norway), where he
and his father had farms, and sent messages to his kinsmen and friends.
Some of them he visited himself, and asked them to assist him with
troops and ships to go to the west, and most of them were willing to
help him in his need.

During the month of Gói,[337] Kol sent away two transport vessels; one
west to England to buy provisions and arms. Sölmund took the other south
to Denmark, to buy such things as Kol told him, because he had all the
management of their equipment. It was intended that these vessels should
return about Easter, and they had arranged to start in the week after
Easter. Kol and Rögnvald had one war-ship each, and Sölmund a third;
they had also a transport ship with provisions. When they came to
Biörgvin, King Harald was there, and he gave Rögnvald a war-ship fully
manned. Jón Fót (leg) had a war-ship also. Aslák, the son of Erlend,
from Hernur, and the daughter’s son of Steigar Thórir, had the sixth; he
had also a barge with provisions. Thus they had six large ships, five
boats, and three transports. When they were waiting for fair wind at
Hernur, a ship came from the west, and they asked for news from the
Orkneys, and also what preparations Earl Paul would have if Earl
Rögnvald came to the west.




                              CHAPTER LXII

                            KOL’S COUNSELS.


WHILE they were lying at Hernur, Earl Rögnvald called together a meeting
of his men, and spoke of Earl Paul’s preparations, and also of the great
enmity the Orkneymen showed against himself, since they were going to
prevent him taking possession of his patrimonial inheritance, which had
been justly given him by the Kings of Norway. He made a long and
eloquent speech, the conclusion of which was that he intended to go to
the Orkneys and gain them or die there. His speech was approved of by
all, and every one promised him faithful support.

Then Kol arose and said: “We have heard from the Orkneys that all the
islanders will rise with Earl Paul against you to keep you out of your
inheritance. They are slow to lay aside the enmity which they have
conceived against you, kinsman. Now it is my counsel to seek for help
where it is likely to be had effectually, and to pray that he may permit
you to enjoy these possessions, to whom they rightly belong—namely, the
Holy Saint Magnus, your mother’s brother. It is my wish that you should
make a vow to him, that he may grant you your patrimony and his
inheritance. You should promise one thing—that if you obtain those
dominions you will build a stone minster at Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall) in the
Orkneys, more magnificent than any other in these lands, dedicating it
to your kinsman, Earl Magnus the Holy, endowing it with money, so that
it may be fitly established, and that his relics and the Bishop’s see
may be brought there.”

Every one thought this good advice, and the vow was made and confirmed.
Then they stood out to sea, and had a fair wind. They landed in
Hjaltland, and the inhabitants there, as well as the Norwegians, were
glad to see each other. The Hjaltlanders were able to tell them much
from the Orkneys, and there they stayed for some time.




                             CHAPTER LXIII

                            OF KOL AND UNI.


UNI, who has been mentioned before, and who was an accomplice in the
slaughter of Brynjúlf, was now advanced in years.

Once Kol said to him: “What plan would you propose, Uni, in order to get
the beacon in Fridarey discontinued, or how would you manage to prevent
it from being lighted a second time? I put this question to you, because
I know you are more ready-witted than most others here present, although
here are men of more distinction.”

Uni replied: “I am not a man of invention, and I do not wish the
expedition to be made according to my plans; I would rather choose to
come afterwards, for then I should follow my own devices.”

Shortly after, Kol had many small boats made ready, and directed their
course to the Orkneys. No chiefs took part in this expedition except
Kol. When they had gone so far that they thought they could be seen from
Fridarey, Kol had the sails spread on all the boats, but ordered his men
to row backwards, in order that their speed might be as slow as
possible, although the wind was right astern. The sails were at first
hauled to the middle of the masts only, but afterwards higher, as if
they were coming nearer to the island.

Kol said: “These manœuvres will be seen from Fridarey as if the boats
were approaching nearer. They will then perhaps light the beacon, but
they will go themselves to Earl Paul to tell him the news.”

So when the beacon in Fridarey was seen, Thorstein, Ragna’s son, lighted
the beacon in Rínarsey; then the beacons were lighted one after another
in all the Islands, and all the Bœndr went to the Earl, and there was a
great gathering of men.

When Kol saw the beacon burning, he ordered his men to turn back, saying
that this would now cause dissensions among their enemies. This done,
Kol went back to Hjaltland, and said to Uni that he should now carry out
his scheme.

Uni took with him three Hjaltlanders, and they took a six-oared boat,
some provisions, and fishing tackle. They went to Fridarey. Uni said he
was a Norwegian, but had been married in Hjaltland, and had sons there.
He further said that he had been robbed by Earl Rögnvald’s men, and
spoke very ill of them. He took a house there, but his sons went out
fishing, and he stayed at home himself and took care of the fish they
caught. He entered into conversation with the men of the island, and
became familiar with them, and was well liked.




                              CHAPTER LXIV

                           OF THE ORKNEYMEN.


WHEN Dagfinn had lighted the beacon, he went to Paul, as has been
mentioned before. All the Earl’s leading men came to him also. A watch
was kept for Rögnvald’s movements, and it was thought strange that he
nowhere appeared. Still the troops were kept together for three days.
Then the Islanders began to murmur, saying that it was great foolishness
to light beacons when fishermen were seen in their boats.

Thorstein, Ragna’s son, was blamed for having lighted the beacon in
Rínarsey. He replied that he could do nothing but light his beacon when
he saw the blaze in Fridarey, and said that this had all happened
through Dagfinn.

Dagfinn replied: “People come more frequently to harm through you when
you cannot blame me for it.”

Thorstein told him to be silent, and leapt up with an axe and dealt him
a heavy blow. Then each man seized his weapons, and there was a fray.
This was in Hrossey, not far from Kirkiuvag. Sigurd from Westness, and
his son Hákon Kló, and Brynjúlf, took part with Hlödver, Dagfinn’s
father, but Thorstein was aided by his kinsmen. Then the Earl was
informed of what was going on, and it was a long time until he could
part them.

Kugi of Westrey made a long speech, and said: “Do not disgrace the Earl
by fighting among yourselves. Ere long you will need all your men; let
us take care then not to be disabled or at enmity among ourselves. This
has probably happened according to the designs of our enemies, and has
been a device of theirs to destroy the beacons in this way. Now they may
be expected every day, and let us make our plans accordingly.”

Dagfinn said: “No one has had any evil intention in this, but we have
acted with more thoughtlessness than we ought to have done.”

Kugi guessed the whole truth, and spoke many wise words about it. At
last they both agreed that the Earl should judge between them; and it
was resolved to disperse the gathering, and the people went home.

A man by name Eirik was now appointed to take charge of the beacon in
Fridarey. When Uni had stopped there a short time, he came to Eirik, and
said: “Would you like me to take care of the beacon; I have nothing else
to do, and can give it my undivided attention.” Eirik accepted his
offer, and when no one was near Uni poured water over it, and made it so
wet that it could not be lighted.




                              CHAPTER LXV

                 THE BEACONS OF THE ORKNEYS DESTROYED.


EARL RÖGNVALD and his men said they would wait until the tidal currents
were met by an east wind, for then it is hardly possible to go from
Westrey to Hrossey, but with east wind one can sail from Hjaltland to
Westrey. For this Rögnvald and his men waited, and came one Friday
evening to Höfn,[338] in Westrey, to Helgi, who dwelt there.

No beacons could be lighted, for when the sails were seen from Fridarey,
Eirik prepared to go to Earl Paul, and sent a man to Uni to light the
beacon, but when he came there Uni was away. When the man tried to light
the beacon himself, it was so wet that it would not burn. When Eirik
heard this, he knew what was the matter, and went to Earl Paul and told
him.

When Earl Rögnvald had arrived in Westrey, the islanders ran together.
Helgi and Kugi put themselves at their head, and their first plan was to
try to make peace with the Earl; and their dealings ended in such a way
that the Westreymen submitted to Earl Rögnvald, and swore him oaths of
fealty.




                              CHAPTER LXVI

                      ROGNVALD RULES THE ORKNEYS.


ON Sunday Earl Rögnvald had mass celebrated there in the village.[339]
As they were standing outside the church, they saw sixteen men
approaching unarmed, and with their hair close cut. The Earl’s men
thought their dress singular, and spoke among themselves of who they
might be. Then the Earl made a ditty:

                Sixteen have I seen together,
                With a small tuft on their foreheads;
                Surely these are women coming,
                All without their golden trinkets.
                Now may we of this bear witness.
                In the west here all the maidens
                Wear their hair short—that isle Elon[340]
                Lies out in the stormy ocean.

After Sunday, Earl Rögnvald’s men visited the neighbouring districts,
and all the people gave in their submission to the Earl. One night in
Westrey the Earl’s men became aware that the islanders were holding a
secret meeting to devise some treachery against Earl Rögnvald. When the
Earl heard of it, he rose and went to the place of meeting. When he came
there, his men had beaten many of the islanders, and had taken Farmer
Kugi and put him in fetters, saying that he was the author of all these
proceedings. Kugi pled his cause eloquently, and many put in a word for
him, and protested his innocence with him. Then the Earl sang:

                  I can see the crooked irons
                  Fastened round the legs of Kugi;
                  Stray thou canst not in thy fetters,
                  Old man! fond of making night trips;
                  Now you must not hold night meetings,
                  And must keep the peace established;
                  Kugi! all your tricks are hinder’d,
                  And your oaths you must keep sacred.

The Earl pardoned them all, and they renewed their compact.




                             CHAPTER LXVII

                       OF EARL ROGNVALD AND PAUL.


AFTER Earl Rögnvald’s arrival in the Orkneys, and when many had
submitted to him, Earl Paul held a meeting in Hrossey with his men for
consultation. The Earl asked their opinion of what was to be done in
these difficulties. There were considerable differences of opinion. Some
advised Earl Paul to share his dominions with Earl Rögnvald. But most of
the more powerful men and Bœndr wished to buy Rögnvald away with money,
and offered their means for that purpose. Others were for fighting, as
they said that this had been the successful way before.

Earl Rögnvald had spies at the meeting, and when they came to him, the
Earl asked a certain skald, who had been there, for news. He sang:—

                Of our foes I gain’d this knowledge
                That o’er secrets they are brooding.
                From the meeting of the Bœndr
                Has the great chief heard the tidings
                That among the powerful feeders
                Of the wolves, the wish prevails that
                All your ships should leave the islands
                And that Paul should rule the land here.

Then Earl Rögnvald sent men to see the Bishop, and asked for his
intervention. He also sent for Thorstein, Ragna’s son, and Thorstein,
Hávard’s son, in Sandey, and requested them to try to make peace between
him and his kinsman. The Bishop procured a fortnight’s truce, in order
that they might endeavour to establish a more lasting peace. Then the
islands were allocated that should maintain each of them in the
meantime.[341] Earl Rögnvald went to Hrossey (Mainland), and Earl Paul
to Hrólfsey (Rousay).

At this time it happened that the kinsmen Swein, Asleif’s son, Jón Væng
of Uppland in Háey, and Rikgard of Brekkur in Stiórnsey (Stronsay),
attacked Thorkel Flettir on the estate which had belonged to Valthióf,
and burnt him in the house, with nine others. After that they went to
Earl Rögnvald, and told him that they would go to Earl Paul with the
whole body of their kinsmen, if he would not receive them; but he did
not turn them away.

As soon as Haflidi, Thorkel’s son, heard of his father’s burning, he
went to Earl Paul, who received him well.

After this Jón and his men bound themselves to serve Earl Rögnvald, who
had now many followers in the Islands, and had become popular. Earl
Rögnvald gave leave to Jón, Sölmund, and Aslák, and many others of his
partizans, to go home, but they said they preferred to wait until
matters should be definitely settled. Earl Rögnvald replied: “If it is
the will of God that I should gain possession of the Orkneys, I think He
and the Holy Earl Magnus, my kinsman, will give me strength to hold
them, even if you go home to your estates.”

Then they went home to Norway.




                             CHAPTER LXVIII

                     SWEIN TAKES EARL PAUL CAPTIVE.


EARLY in the spring, Swein, Asleif’s son, left the Sudreyar (Hebrides),
and went to Scotland to see his friends. He stayed a long time at
Atjöklar (Athole) with Earl Maddad and Margaret, Hákon’s daughter, and
had many secret consultations with them. Swein heard that there were
disturbances in the Orkneys, and became desirous of going there to see
his kinsmen. He went first to Thórsey (Thurso), in Caithness,
accompanied by a nobleman by name Liótólf. Swein had stayed with him a
long time in the spring. They came to Earl Ottar, at Thórsey, the
brother of Frákork. Liótólf tried to make them compose the matters that
had been done by Frákork’s orders, and Earl Ottar made compensation for
his part. He promised his friendship to Swein, and he promised to Ottar,
in return, to help Erlend, the son of Harald Sléttmáli (smooth-talker),
to obtain his patrimony in the Orkneys when he should wish to claim it.

Swein changed ships there, and took a barge manned by thirty men. He
crossed the Pentland Firth with a north-westerly wind, and so along the
west side of Hrossey, on to Efjusund,[342] and along the sound to
Hrólfsey (Rousay). At one end of the island there is a large headland
and a vast heap of stones beneath it. Otters often resorted to this
stone-heap. As they were rowing along the sound, Swein said, “There are
men on the headland, let us land and ask them for news; let us change
our dress, untie our hammocks,[343] and twenty of us lie down there, and
ten keep on rowing: let us go leisurely.” When they came near the
headland the men in the island called to them to row to Westness, and
bring Earl Paul what was in their vessel, thinking they were speaking to
merchants. Earl Paul had spent the night at a feast with Sigurd, at
Westness. He had been early up in the morning, and twenty men had gone
south on the island to catch otters, which were in the stone-heap
beneath the headland. They were going home to get a morning draught. The
men in the barge rowed near the land; they asked the men on shore about
all the news, and were asked what news they brought, and whence they
came. Swein’s men also asked where the Earl was, and the others said he
was on the stone-heap there. This was heard by Swein and those that lay
hid with him in the skin-bags. Swein told them to row to land, where
they could not be seen from the headland. Then he told his men to get
their weapons, and slay the Earl’s men wherever they found them, and so
they did. Swein’s party killed nineteen men, and lost six. They seized
Earl Paul with violence, and brought him on board their ship, and stood
out to sea, returning by the same way, by the west side of Hrólfsey, and
through the channel between Háey and Grimsey, and then by the east of
Svelgr,[344] thence to Breidafiord (the Moray Firth), until they came to
Ekkialsbakki.[345] There he left his ship with twenty men, and continued
his journey until he came to Earl Maddad[346] and Margaret, Earl Paul’s
sister, at Atjöklar (Athole). There they were well received. Earl Maddad
placed Earl Paul in his high seat, and when they were seated, Margaret
entered with a long train of ladies, and advanced to her brother. Then
men were procured to amuse them; but Earl Paul was moody, and it was no
wonder, for he had many cares.

It is not recorded what passed between Earl Paul and Swein while they
were on the journey together. Earl Maddad, Margaret, and Swein, had a
consultation together; but in the evening, when the drinking was
finished, Swein’s followers were conducted to a sleeping-room by
themselves, and the key turned upon them. This was done every evening
while they were there.




                              CHAPTER LXIX

            OF SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON’S, RETURN TO THE ORKNEYS.


ONE day Margaret announced that Swein, Asleif’s son, should go to the
Orkneys to see Earl Rögnvald, and ask him whom he preferred to share in
the dominion of the Orkneys with him—Earl Paul, or Harald, the son of
(her husband) Maddad, who was then three winters old.

When Earl Paul heard this, he said: “So far as my mind is concerned, I
will say that I have left my dominions in such a way as has never been
heard of before, I think; and I shall never return to the Orkneys any
more. I see that this must be God’s vengeance for the theft which I and
my kinsmen committed. But if God thinks the dominion mine, then will I
give it to Harald, if he may enjoy it; but I wish some money given to
me, so that I may establish myself in some monastery, and you can take
care that I do not escape. And you, Swein, shall go out to the Orkneys,
and say that I have been blinded, or still more mutilated, because my
friends will fetch me if I am an unmaimed man. In that case I may not be
able to refuse to return to my dominions with them, for I suspect that
they will consider our parting a greater loss than it is.”

What more the Earl said has not been placed on record.

Then Swein, Asleif’s son, went to the Orkneys, and Earl Paul remained
behind in Scotland.

This is how Swein related these matters. But some men tell the story in
a way by no means so creditable (to those concerned)—namely, that
Margaret induced Swein, Asleif’s son, to blind her brother Earl Paul,
then threw him into a dungeon, and subsequently induced another man to
put him to death. We do not know which of these two statements is the
more correct; but it is well known that Earl Paul came never again to
the Orkneys, and that he had no dominions in Scotland.




                              CHAPTER LXX

               OF EARL ROGNVALD AND SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON.


IT happened at Westness, when the Earl did not come home, that Sigurd
sent men to search for him. When they came to the stone-heap they saw
the slain, and then they thought the Earl had been killed. They went
home and told the news. Sigurd went immediately to examine the bodies,
and they recognised nineteen as the Earl’s men; but six they did not
know. Then Sigurd sent men to Egilsey, to the Bishop, to tell him the
news. He went immediately to Sigurd. When they were talking about what
had happened, Sigurd hinted that it had been done at the instigation of
Earl Rögnvald; but the Bishop replied that it would be proved that Earl
Rögnvald had not acted treacherously towards his kinsman Earl Paul. “It
is my opinion,” he said, “that some others have committed this crime.”

Borgar, the son of Játvör, Erlend’s daughter, who lived at
Geitaberg,[347] had seen the barge coming from the south, and returning.
When this was heard, it was believed to have been done at the
instigation of Frákork and Olvir.

When the news spread in the Islands that Earl Paul had disappeared, and
no one knew what had become of him, the Islanders had a consultation,
and most of them went to Earl Rögnvald, and swore fealty to him; but
Sigurd, of Westness, and his sons, Brynjúlf and Hákon Kló, said they
would not swear oaths of fealty to any man while they did not know
anything of Earl Paul, or whether he might he expected to return or not.
There were others also who refused to swear oaths to Earl Rögnvald.
Others again fixed an hour or a day when they would become Earl
Rögnvald’s men, if Earl Paul had not then been heard of. But when Earl
Rögnvald saw that he had to do with many powerful men, he did not refuse
peremptorily anything which the people asked; and, as the time passed,
he had frequent meetings with the inhabitants, and at each of them some
submitted to him.

One day it happened in Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall) when Earl Rögnvald was
holding a Thing meeting with the Bœndr, that nine armed men were seen
walking from Skálpeid (Scapa) to the meeting. When they came near,
Swein, Asleif’s son, was recognised, and all were curious to know what
news he had to tell. He had come in a ship to Skálpeid, and left it
there, while he and his men walked to Kirkiuvag. When Swein came to the
meeting, his kinsmen and friends turned to him, and asked him for news,
but he did not say much. Swein sent for the Bishop, who welcomed him
heartily, because they had long been friends. They went aside to talk,
and Swein told the Bishop the whole truth about what he had done, and
asked for his advice in these difficult circumstances.

The Bishop said: “Those are weighty tidings you have brought, Swein, and
we shall probably not be by ourselves sufficient in this matter. I wish
you to wait here for me; but I shall plead your cause before the people
and Earl Rögnvald.”

Then the Bishop went to the meeting, and asked for silence. When silence
was obtained, the Bishop pleaded Swein’s cause, explaining for what
reason he had left the Orkneys, and what penalties Earl Paul had
inflicted on him for the slaying of Swein Brióstreip, a most wicked man.
The Bishop concluded by asking Earl Rögnvald and all the people to grant
security to Swein.

Earl Rögnvald replied: “For my part, I promise Swein three nights’
security; but I think I can see from your countenance, Sir Bishop, that
you and Swein know some great news which you have not yet made known. I
wish you to take Swein into your keeping, and to be responsible for him,
and I will speak to him to-morrow.”

“I will,” said the Bishop; “and he will be very glad to speak to you as
soon as possible; for he wishes to become your man, if you are willing
to receive him.”

The Earl replied: “I do not think my friends are too many in these
lands, yet I shall have some farther talk before I consent to this.”

Then these four—Earl Rögnvald, his father Kol, the Bishop, and Swein,
Asleif’s son—had a private interview. Swein repeated everything, good
and bad, that had happened between him and Earl Paul, and they came to
the conclusion to send away the bulk of the people at the meeting. The
Earl arose next morning and gave the people permission to go home; but
when the multitude had gone away, he called together all those that
remained, and made them all renew their promise of security to Swein,
while he told the news.

In the morning, Magnus[348] Karl, the brother of the Holy Earl Magnus,
was persuaded to tell Sigurd of Westness and his sons of Earl Paul’s
abduction, that he was not to be expected back to his dominions, and
that he had been maimed.

Sigurd said: “Great news do I think this, about the carrying away of the
Earl; yet to me the saddest of all is that he should have been maimed,
for he would not be anywhere where I would not go to him.” Afterwards he
told his friends that Hákon would not have left him unharmed, if he had
had a sufficient force with him when he told him these tidings, so
greatly was he moved by them.

When the news became generally known, all the Orkneymen submitted to
Earl Rögnvald, and he became the sole ruler of Earl Paul’s dominions.

Not long after this the foundations of St. Magnus’ Church[349] were
marked out, and craftsmen procured, so that more was done during that
year than in the ensuing four or five. Kol took great interest in the
erection of the building, and had the principal oversight of the whole;
but as it proceeded, it became very expensive to the Earl, and his means
were nearly exhausted. Then he consulted his father, and he advised him
to pass a law declaring that the Earls should be considered to have
inherited all the odal possessions from the owners, but that they were
to be redeemable by the heirs.[350] This was considered a great
hardship. Then Earl Rögnvald called a Thing meeting, and proposed to the
Bœndr that they should purchase the odal possessions, so that it would
not be necessary to redeem them afterwards, and an agreement was made
with which all parties were satisfied. It was to this effect, that they
should pay the Earl one mark (eight oz. of silver) for each plough’s
land all over the Islands. From that time there was no want of money to
build the church; and it was made a magnificent structure.




                              CHAPTER LXXI

                   BISHOP JÓN ARRIVES FROM SCOTLAND.


WHEN Earl Rögnvald had ruled the Orkneys two winters he had a Yule-feast
at his estate called Knarrarstadir.[351] The sixth day of Yule a ship
was seen crossing the Pentland Firth from the south. It was a fine day,
and the Earl was outside the house, with many men, looking at the ship.
There was also a man named Hrólf, the Earl’s court priest. When the
strangers landed, they left the ship, and the Earl’s men calculated
their number to be fifteen or sixteen.[352] In front of them walked a
man in a blue cloak, with his hair tucked up under the cap; the lower
part of the chin was shaved,[353] but the lips unshaved, and the long
beard was hanging down (from them). They thought this man somewhat
strange, but Hrólf said it was Bishop Jón from Atjöklar (Athole), in
Scotland. Then the Earl went to meet them, and gave the Bishop a
gracious welcome. He placed him in his high seat, but served at the
table himself like a waiter.

Early next morning the Bishop held a service, and went to Egilsey to see
Bishop William. This was the tenth day of Yule. Then both the Bishops
went with a noble suite to visit Earl Rögnvald, and told him their
business, explaining the agreement between Swein, Asleif’s son, and Earl
Maddad—namely, that their son Harald should bear the title of Earl, and
have half the Orkneys jointly with Earl Rögnvald, but Earl Rögnvald
should have the government in his hands, even when Harald grew up; and
if a difference arose between them, Earl Rögnvald should have his own
way.

Swein was present, and confirmed the Bishop’s statement. It was resolved
to hold a meeting during Lent in Caithness, and there they agreed upon
the terms above mentioned, and their agreement was confirmed by the
oaths of the best men of the Orkneys and Scotland. Then Harald, Maddad’s
son, went to the Orkneys with Earl Rögnvald, and was invested with the
title of Earl.

Harald was accompanied to the islands by Thorbiörn Klerk, the son of
Thorstein Höld, and Gudrún, the daughter of Frákork. He was a wise and a
great man. He was foster-father to Harald at that time, and had great
influence with him. Thorbiörn married in the Orkneys Ingirid, Olaf’s
daughter, sister to Swein, Asleif’s son. He was sometimes in the
Orkneys, and sometimes in Scotland. He was a most valiant man, but
overbearing in most things.

Swein, Asleif’s son, took possession of all the estates that belonged to
his father Olaf and his brother Valthióf; he became a great chief, and
had always many men with him. He was a wise man, and far-seeing in many
things; but overbearing and rash. No two men in the west were considered
at that time greater than the brothers-in-law Swein and Thorbiörn, and
there was a warm friendship between them.




                             CHAPTER LXXII

                        THE BURNING OF FRAKORK.


ON one occasion Swein, Asleif’s son, asked Earl Rögnvald to give him
troops and ships to take vengeance on Olvir and Frákork for the burning
of his father Olaf.

The Earl said: “Do you not think, Swein, that Olvir and that old hag
Frákork, who is good for nothing, will scarcely be able to do us any
harm now?”

Swein replied: “They will always be mischievous while they live; and I
expected something else when I did great things for you, than that you
would refuse me this.”

The Earl replied: “What will you be satisfied with?”

Swein said: “Two ships well equipped.”

The Earl said he should have what he wished.

Then he made preparations for going. When he was ready he sailed south
to Borgarfiord,[354] and had a northwest wind to Dúfeyrar,[355] which is
a trading-place in Scotland. From there he passed Moray to
Ekkialsbakki,[356] and from there he went to Earl Maddad at Atjöklar
(Athole). He gave Swein guides who knew the way across mountains and
forests wherever Swein wished to go; and he went through the interior of
the country, over mountains and through woods, away from all
habitations, and came down in Hjálmundal,[357] near the middle of
Sutherland. Olvir and Frákork had had spies wherever they thought they
might expect enemies from the Orkneys, but this way they did not expect
any. They did not, therefore, perceive the enemy till Swein and his men
were in a certain slope behind the house. Olvir Rosta met them there
with sixty men, and the fight began immediately. There was little
resistance on the part of Olvir’s men, and they retreated towards the
houses, because they could not reach the wood. A great many were killed,
and Olvir ran to Hjálmundal’s river, and then up on the mountains. After
that he went to Scotland’s Firth (on the west coast), and from there to
the Sudreyar (Hebrides), and he is not mentioned further in this Saga.

When Olvir escaped, Swein and his men approached the houses, and
plundered everything. Then they burnt the houses, with all the inmates,
and there Frákork perished. Swein and his men committed many ravages in
Sutherland before they went to their ships. After that they were out on
raids during the summer, and ravaged in Scotland.

In the autumn Swein came to Earl Rögnvald in the Orkneys, and was well
received. Then he crossed over to Ness (Caithness), and spent the winter
in Dungalsbæ. At this time Swein received a message from Höldbodi, in
the Sudreyar, that he should come and help him, because Höld from
Bretland had been there, driven him from his estates, and taken much
booty. The messenger was named Hródbjart (Robert), of English descent.
When Swein received the message, he quickly left for the Orkneys, and
called on Earl Rögnvald, and requested him to give him troops and ships.
The Earl asked Swein what he was going to do then. He said that he had
received a message from a man whom he ought least of all to refuse, and
who had proved his best friend in his greatest need, and when most
others were his enemies.

The Earl said: “It is well if you part good friends, but most of those
Sudreyarmen are treacherous. You must, however, act a manly part, and I
will give you two ships fully manned.”

Swein was well pleased with this, and went to the Sudreyar, but did not
find Höldbodi till he came to the Isle of Man, because the latter had
fled thither. When Swein came to the Isle of Man, Höldbodi was very glad
to see him. The British Höld had plundered and killed men, to a large
extent in the Isle of Man as well as in the Sudreyar. He had killed a
nobleman named Andrew, who left a widow by name Ingirid, and a son by
name Sigurd. Ingirid was wealthy, and had large estates. Höldbodi
advised Swein to woo her; and when he proposed marriage, she made it a
condition of her acceptance that he should avenge her late husband
Andrew.

Swein replied: “I may inflict some loss on the British, but we cannot
know how we may succeed in manslaying.”

Then Swein and Höldbodi went out on an expedition with five ships. They
plundered in Bretland, landing at a place called Jarlsness,[358] and
committing great ravages. One morning they went into a certain village,
and met with a little resistance. The inhabitants fled from the village,
and Swein and his men plundered everything, and burnt six homesteads
before dinner. An Icelander, named Eirík was with Swein, and sang the
following:

                 Half-a-dozen homesteads burning,
                 Half-a-dozen households plundered:
                 This was Swein’s work of a morning—
                 This his vengeance; coals he lent them.

After this they went to their ships. They were out reiving all the
summer, and obtained much booty, but Höld fled into an island called
Lund,[359] where there was a strong place. Swein besieged it for some
time, to no purpose. In the autumn they went back to the Isle of Man.




                            CHAPTER LXXIII.

                     OF SWEIN AND HOLDBÖDI’S RAIDS.


THIS winter Swein married Ingirid, and remained there, greatly honoured.
In the spring he gathered men together, and went to see Höldbodi, and
asked for his assistance, but he excused himself, saying that many of
his men were occupied, and some on trading trips; so Swein got none
there. But the truth was, that he had secretly made peace with Höld, and
confirmed their alliance by exchanging presents. Swein went out,
nevertheless, with three ships, but made little booty in the earlier
part of the summer. Later they went south, under Ireland, and seized a
barge belonging to some monks in Syllingar,[360] and plundered it. He
made inroads in Ireland in many places, obtained a large booty, and
returned to the Isle of Man in autumn.

When Swein had been a short time at home, he heard a report to the
effect that Höldbodi was not faithful to him, but Swein shrank from
believing it. One night in the spring Swein’s watchmen came to him and
said that enemies were approaching them. Swein and his men seized their
arms, and ran out, and saw a great number of men carrying fire to the
homestead. Then Swein and his men ran to a hill, and defended themselves
from it. They had a horn[361] which they sounded. The neighbourhood was
thickly inhabited, and men came flocking to help Swein, so that the
assailants at last gave way. Swein and his men pursued them, and killed
many in the flight, but many of both sides were wounded before they
parted. The chief of the attacking band was Höldbodi. He escaped in the
flight, and did not stop till he came to Lundey (Lundy Isle). Höld
received him well, and they remained together. Swein went home, and kept
a large number of his men about him, maintaining a strict watch, because
he distrusted the Sudreyarmen. Late in the winter he sold his lands, and
went early in the spring to Liódhús (Lewis). During this expedition he
had committed many ravages.




                             CHAPTER LXXIV

                      OF EARL ROGNVALD AND SWEIN.


WHILE Swein was in the Sudreyar, Earl Rögnvald went over to Caithness,
and was entertained at Vík (Wick) by a man named Harald. His son was
named Swein, an active fellow. While the Earl was there, Thorbiörn Klerk
came up from Scotland, and said that his father, Thorstein Höld, had
been killed by a certain Earl. People talked of how frequently Earl
Rögnvald and Thorbiörn spoke together, because the Earl scarcely took
leisure to discharge his duties for that reason. Thorbiörn went with the
Earl out to the Islands (Orkneys), and Swein, Harald’s son, became the
Earl’s tableboy Thorbiörn had been in Scotland for some time. He had
slain two men who had been with Swein, Asleif’s son, at the burning of
Frákork.

When Swein came from the Sudreyar, he went home to his farm in Gáreksey
(Gairsay), and not to Earl Rögnvald, as he used to do when he came from
his expeditions. So when the Earl heard that Swein had come home from
the Sudreyar in the summer, he asked Thorbiörn for what reason he
thought Swein did not come to him.

Thorbiörn replied: “I suppose Swein is offended with me because I had
those men slain who were with him at the burning of Frákork.”

The Earl said: “I do not like you to be enemies.”

Then Earl Rögnvald went to Gáreksey, and tried to reconcile them, which
was easy, because they both wished the Earl to judge between them. Then
he made peace between them, and it lasted for a long time after.




                              CHAPTER LXXV

                     EARL ROGNVALD’S PLEASANTRIES.


AT this time there came a certain Icelandic ship to the Orkneys, in
which was a man by name Hall, the son of Thórarinn Breidmagi (broad
waist). He went to Rínarsey (North Ronaldsay), to stay with Thorstein
and Ragna. He became tired of staying there, and asked Thorstein to
bring him to Earl Rögnvald. They went to see him, but the Earl would not
receive Hall. When they came home, Ragna asked how they had succeeded,
and Hall replied by a ditty:

                  It was to thy own son, Ragna,
                  (Let truth be known among the people)
                  I gave the noble task of asking
                  My reception ’mong the courtiers;
                  But the generous ring-giver,
                  Who enjoys the highest honour,
                  Has declined my clownish service,
                  Having plenty of the bravest.

Shortly afterwards Ragna went to see Earl Rögnvald on this errand
herself. She was so dressed that she had a red head-gear of horse’s
hair; and when the Earl saw her he sang:

                 Never did I know before this
                 How the ladies of the cross-bench
                 Deck their heads with finest kerchiefs.
                 If I use the proper language,
                 Seems to me that this gold-wearer
                 Hides the tresses of her hind-head
                 With a chestnut filly’s tail-locks,
                 And her head-dress shows her temper.

Ragna said: “Now the saying comes true, ‘that few are so wise that they
see everything as it is,’ for this [hair] is of a horse, and not of a
mare.”

Then she took a silken kerchief and wrapped it round her head,
continuing, nevertheless, her business with the Earl. He gave her a
rather cold answer at first, but became more pleasant as they spoke
longer, and she obtained what she wanted—namely, to procure for Hall a
place at the (Earl’s) court. He remained a long time with Earl Rögnvald.
They made jointly the “Old Metrekey,”[362] with five verses for each
different metre. Afterwards that was thought too much, and now two
verses only are made for each different metre.




                             CHAPTER LXXVI

               OF EARL ROGNVALD AND SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON.


SWEIN, Asleif’s son, is said to have heard that Höldbodi had arrived in
the Sudreyar. Then he asked Earl Rögnvald to give him troops to avenge
himself. The Earl gave him five ships, and Thorbiörn Klerk was the
commander of one of them; Haflidi, the son of Thorkel Flettir, of
another; Dúfniál, the son of Hávard, Gunni’s son, the third; Rikgard
(Richard), Thorleif’s son, the fourth; and Swein, Asleif’s son, the
fifth. When Höldbodi heard of Swein, he fled from the Sudreyar. Swein
and his men killed many people in the Sudreyar, and ravaged and burnt
far and wide. They obtained great booty, but could not catch Höldbodi,
and he never came to the Sudreyar after that. Swein wished to remain in
the Sudreyar during the winter, but Thorbiörn and the others wished to
go home, and went in the autumn to Caithness, and arrived at Dungalsbæ.
When they were going to divide their booty, Swein said they should all
share equally, but that he himself should have a chief’s share besides,
saying that he had been the chief, and that the Earl had sent the others
to his assistance. Besides, he added further that he alone had the
quarrel with the Sudreyarmen, while the others had none. Thorbiörn,
however, said he did not deserve less than Swein, and had not been less
a leader than he. They also wished that all the ships’ commanders should
have equal shares; but they had to submit to Swein, because his men were
by far the most numerous there on the Ness (in Caithness).

Thorbiörn went out to the Orkneys and told Earl Rögnvald how matters had
gone between him and Swein, and that they were very much displeased to
have been deprived by him of their just proportion of the spoil.

The Earl said it would not be only once that Swein had turned out not to
be an equitable man, yet he would in the end receive retribution for his
injustice; but, he added: “You shall not quarrel about this. I shall
give you as much money of my own as you have lost through him, and it is
my will that you do not claim it of him. It will be a good thing if this
does not lead to greater difficulties with him.”

Thorbiörn replied: “May God reward you, my lord, for the honour you do
us, and we shall not quarrel with Swein about this; but I shall never be
his friend any more, and I shall do him some despite in return.” And
after that Thorbiörn divorced himself from Ingirid, Swein’s sister, and
sent her to him over to Ness (Caithness). Swein received her well, but
considered Thorbiörn’s conduct a great insult to himself. There was then
fierce enmity between them. Then the saying proved true that monsters
are best matched together.

When Swein was in the Sudreyar, he had placed Margad, Grím’s son, over
his affairs at Dungalsbæ, and transferred to him the office (of deputy
or factor) which he held from Earl Rögnvald, but Margad was resentful
and overbearing, and became unpopular on account of his violence. Those
who were the first objects of his oppression ran to Hróald (at Wick),
and remained there. From this enmity arose between the two. Shortly
after Margad went south to Vík (Wick) on business with nineteen men, and
before he left he attacked Hróald, and killed him and several others.
Then he went to Dungalsbæ to see Swein. The latter gathered men
together, and went to Lambaborg,[363] where he fortified himself. It was
a strong place, and there he remained, with sixty men, and brought
thither provisions and other necessaries. The borg (castle) was situated
on a sea-girt rock, and on the landward side there was a well-built
stone wall. The crags ran a long way along the sea on either side. Swein
and his men committed many violent robberies in Caithness, and brought
everything into the stronghold, and became greatly hated.




                             CHAPTER LXXVII

                  OF SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON’S MOVEMENTS.


THIS news came to the ears of Earl Rögnvald, and Swein, Hróald’s son,
and he asked the Earl to help him to obtain redress in this cause; and
many supported Swein’s request. At last Earl Rögnvald crossed over to
Ness (Caithness), and the following chiefs with him:—Thorbiörn; Haflidi,
Thorkel’s son; and Dúfniál, Hávard’s son. These counselled the most
severe measures against Swein. They went to Dungalsbæ, but Swein was not
there. They heard that he was in Lambaborg, and then the Earl went
thither. When they came to the borg, Swein asked who their leader was,
and he was told that it was Earl Rögnvald. Swein asked him what he
wanted. The Earl said he wished him to deliver Margad up to them. Swein
asked whether he was to receive quarter. The Earl said he would not
promise. Then Swein said: “I have not the heart to deliver Margad into
the power of Swein, Hróald’s son, or of my other enemies who are with
you, but I should wish very much to be at peace with you, my lord.”

Then Thorbiörn Klerk said: “Hear what the traitor says, that he would
willingly be at peace with his lord after he has plundered his land, and
betaken himself to the highways like a thief. You make a bad return to
the Earl for all the honour he has done you, and so you will do to all
you can.”

Swein replied: “You need not say much in this case, Thorbiörn, for no
respect will be paid to your words. But it is my foreboding that you
will repay him worse for all the honour he has done to you, before you
part, for nobody will gain good fortune from any dealings with you.”

Then Earl Rögnvald said that men should not rail at each other.

Then they besieged the borg, and cut off all communication, and a long
time passed, as they could not make an assault. And when the provisions
were exhausted, Swein called his men together, and consulted with them.
But they all said, as with one mouth, that they wished to follow his
guidance as long as they were able.

Then Swein said: “I think it most disgraceful to starve here, and
afterwards to surrender to our enemies. It has turned out, as was
likely, that our skill and good fortune should fail against Earl
Rögnvald. We have tried to obtain peace and security for life, but
neither was to be had for my companion Margad. Though I know that the
others will be able to obtain quarter, yet I have not the heart to
deliver him under the axe. Still, it is not right that so many here
should suffer for his difficulties, although I am unwilling to part from
him for a time.”

Then he tied together ropes which they had, and during the night they
let Swein and Margad down from the borg into the sea. They swam along
the cliffs till they came to the end of them, then they got on shore and
went to Sutherland, thence to Moray, and then to Dúfeyrar.[364] There
they met with some Orkneymen in a trading vessel. Hallvard and Thorkel
were the commanders, and they were ten altogether. Swein and Margad went
on board with them, when they were twelve together, and then they sailed
south off Scotland, until they came to Máeyar (the Isle of May). There
was a monastery, the head of which was an abbot, by name Baldwin.[365]
Swein and his men were detained there seven nights by stress of weather.
They said they had been sent by Earl Rögnvald to the King of Scots. The
monks suspected their tale, and thinking they were pirates, sent to the
mainland for men. When Swein and his comrades became aware of this, they
went hastily on board their ship, after having plundered much treasure
from the monastery. They went in along Myrkvifiörd (the Firth of Forth),
and found David, the King of Scots, in Edinburgh. He received Swein
well, and requested him to stay with him. He told the King explicitly
the reason of his visit, how matters had gone between him and Earl
Rögnvald before they parted, and also that they had plundered in Máeyar.
Swein and Margad stayed for a while with the King of Scots, and were
well treated. King David sent men to those who had been robbed by Swein,
and told them to estimate their loss themselves, and then of his own
money he made good to every one his loss.

King David proposed to Swein to bring his wife from the Orkneys, and to
bestow upon him such honours in Scotland as he might be well satisfied
with. Swein declared all his wishes to the King. He said it was his wish
that Margad should remain with him, and that the King should send word
to Earl Rögnvald to be reconciled to him; but he said he would himself
leave his case entirely to the decision of Rögnvald, adding that he was
always well pleased when there was friendship between them, but ill at
ease when they were at enmity.

King David replied: “I suppose this Earl is a good man, and you value
nothing except what comes from him, since you prefer the risk of
surrendering yourself to his good faith, and refuse my offers.”

Swein said he would never give up his friendship, yet he asked the King
to grant him this, and the King said it should be as he wished.

King David sent men to the Orkneys with presents, and a message
requesting that the Earl would make peace with Swein. Then Swein went
north to the Islands, and Margad remained behind with the King. King
David’s messengers went to Earl Rögnvald, who received them well, and
also the presents, promising peace to Swein. Then he was fully
reconciled to Swein, who now returned to his estates.




                            CHAPTER LXXVIII.

                         EARL VALTHIÓF’S DEATH.


WHEN Swein and Margad had left Lambaborg,[366] those that were in the
fort resolved to surrender it to Earl Rögnvald. He asked them what they
knew last of Swein and Margad, and they told the truth.

When the Earl heard it, he said: “To tell the truth, Swein has no equal
among those that are now with us, and such feats are both brave and
hardy; but I will not abuse my power over you, although you were
involved in these troubles with Swein. Every one of you shall go home in
peace as far as I am concerned.”

The Earl went home to the Orkneys, and sent Thorbiörn Klerk in a ship
with forty men south to Breidafiord (the Moray Firth), to search for
Swein; but he heard nothing of him.

Thorbiörn then said to his men: “Our journey is a strange one; we are
all this time wandering after Swein, but I have heard that Earl
Valthióf, who slew my father,[367] is not far off, with but a few men;
and if you will attack him with me, I will promise you that I shall not
act as Swein did—namely, to deprive you of your share if we get any
booty, for you shall have all we get, except what you wish to give me,
because I think glory is better than booty.”

Then they went to the place where Earl Valthióf was at a banquet, and
surprised them in the house, and set it on fire immediately. Valthióf
and his men ran to the door, and asked who was the raiser of the fire.
Thorbiörn told his name. Valthióf offered compensation for Thorstein’s
slaying, but Thorbiörn said it was useless to ask for peace. They
defended themselves bravely for a time; but when the fire pressed them
they ran out; after that their defence was short, because the fire had
overcome them. Earl Valthióf fell, and thirty men with him. Thorbiörn
and his men got a great deal of booty, and he kept all his promises to
them faithfully. Then they went to the Orkneys to Earl Rögnvald, who was
well satisfied with what they had done. Then there was peace and quiet
in the Islands.

At that time a young man lived in the Islands,[368] by name Kolbein
Hruga (heap), a very overbearing man; he built a fine stone castle,[369]
which was a strong defence. Kolbein’s wife was Herbiörg, the sister of
Hákon Barn (child), but their mother was the daughter of Herborg, Paul’s
daughter. Their children were Kolbein Karl, Bjarni Skáld, Sumarlidi,
Aslák, and Frída; they were all well mannered.




                             CHAPTER LXXIX

                     OF EINDRIDI UNGI (THE YOUNG).


AT that time the sons of Harald Gilli[370] ruled over Norway. Eystein
was the oldest of them, but Ingi was a legitimate son, and he was most
honoured by the Lendermen, because he let them have their way in all
things as they liked. At this time the following Lendermen (Barons)
assisted him in the government:—Ogmund and Erling, the son of Kyrpinga
Orm. They advised King Ingi to send word to Earl Rögnvald, and give him
an honourable invitation, saying truly that he had been a great friend
of his father, and desired him to become as intimate with the Earl as he
could, so that he might be a dearer friend of his than of his brother,
whatever might happen between them. The Earl was related to the
brothers, and a great friend of theirs; and when he received this
message, he quickly prepared to go, because he felt a desire to go to
Norway to see his friends and kinsmen. Earl Harald asked to be permitted
to go with him, out of curiosity and to amuse himself; he was then
nineteen winters old.

When the Earls were ready, they started from the west with some
merchants, having a noble retinue, and arrived in Norway early in the
spring. They found King Ingi in Biörgvin (Bergen), and he received them
very well. Earl Rögnvald saw many of his friends and kinsmen, and spent
a great deal of the summer there. Eindridi Ungi (the young) arrived from
Mikligard (Constantinople) that summer; he had been long in service[371]
there, and was able to tell many things from there; and it was thought
good entertainment to inquire from him about things in that part of the
world. The Earl conversed frequently with him.

Once when they were talking, Eindridi said: “It seems strange to me that
you do not think of going out to Jórsalaheim (Jerusalem), and that you
should be satisfied with being told of the things that are there; it
would best suit such men as you are to be there on account of your great
accomplishments, and you will be honoured above all others wherever you
come among noble men.”

When Eindridi had said this, many spoke in favour of it, and exhorted
the Earl to become the leader of such an expedition. Erling made a long
speech in support of the proposal, and said he would join the party
himself, if the Earl would consent to be their chief. And as many men of
note seemed eager for the journey, he promised to go. And when he and
Erling were settling matters between them, many noble men joined the
party. These Lendermen (Barons) were among them: Eindridi Ungi, who was
to be their guide, Jón Pétrsson, Aslák Erlendsson, Guttorm Möl, and Kol
from Halland. It was resolved that none of them should have a larger
ship than with thirty benches, except the Earl, and no one should have
an ornamented vessel but he. This was done in order that no one should
envy another because he had finer men or a better ship than he. Jón Fót
(leg) was to build a ship for the Earl, and to have it as finely fitted
out as possible. Earl Rögnvald went home in the autumn, and intended to
stay at home two winters. King Ingi gave the Earl two long ships—small,
but very beautiful, and specially built for rowing; they were,
therefore, of all the ships the swiftest. Earl Rögnvald gave Harald one
of them, called Fífa; the other was called Hjálp. In these ships the
Earls went to sea, holding westward. Earl Rögnvald had received large
presents from his friends. It was Tuesday evening when the Earls put out
to sea, and they had a fair wind during the night. On Wednesday there
was a great storm, and in the evening they saw land. It was very dark,
and they saw signs of breakers surrounding them on all sides. Up to this
time they had kept together. There was nothing to be done except to run
the vessels on shore, and this they did.[372] The beach before them was
stony and narrow, enclosed behind by crags. All the men were saved, but
they lost a large quantity of their stores. Some of the things were
thrown up by the sea during the night. As usual, Earl Rögnvald bore
himself as the bravest of all the men there. He was so merry that he
played with his fingers, and spoke nearly all his sayings in rhyme. He
took a golden ring from his hand, and sang this ditty:

                   Thus I hang the hammer-beaten
                   Hand-ring from my rounded fingers;
                   Thus I put my fingers through it:
                   So the nymph of crashing waters
                   Threw me, joyful, in a rock-rift
                   There to play me with my fingers.

When they had carried their things up from the sea, they went farther
inland to search for habitations, because they thought they knew they
had landed in Hjaltland. They soon found farms, and distributed
themselves among them. The people were glad to see the Earl, and when he
was asked about his voyage, he sang:

                  Both my ships on beach went crashing;
                  When the surges swept my men off,
                  Sore afflicted by the billows
                  Were the friends of Hjalp and Fífa.
                  Certainly this misadventure
                  Of the danger-seeking rovers
                  Will not soon be quite forgotten
                  By those who got such a wetting.

The mistress of the house brought a fur cloak to the Earl, who,
stretching his hands forward to receive it, and laughing, sang this
ditty:

                 Here I shake a shrunken fur coat;
                 Surely ’tis not ornamental.
                 All our clothes are in the ship-field,
                 And it is too wide to seek them.
                 Lately, all the young sea-horses
                 Left we dressed in splendid garments,
                 As we drove the steeds of mast-heads
                 To the crags, across the surges.

Large fires were made, and there they warmed themselves. A female
servant entered shivering all over, and her words were unintelligible on
account of her shiver. The Earl said he understood her:

                     Asa! you seem quite exhausted.
                     Atatata! ’tis the water.
                     Hutututu! where shall I sit?
                     By the fire—’tis rather chilly.

The Earl sent twelve of his men to Einar in Gullberuvík, but he said he
would not receive them unless the Earl came himself. When Earl Rögnvald
heard this, he sang:

                    Einar said he would give food to
                    None of all the lads of Rögnvald,
                    He himself alone excepted—
                    (Empty words I now am talking),
                    For I know that he, the friendly,
                    Never failed to keep his promise.
                    Go we in then where the fires are
                    Burning brightly all the evening.

The Earl stayed a long time in Hjaltland, and in the autumn he went
south to the Orkneys, and resided in his dominions. That autumn two
Hjaltlanders[373] came to him. One was named Armód, a poet; the other
was Oddi the little, the son of Glúm: he made verses well. The Earl
received them both as his men. The Earl had a grand Yule feast, to which
he invited guests, and gave his men presents. He handed a spear, inlaid
with gold, to the poet Armód, shook it at him, and told him to make a
song on the spur of the moment:

                   Princely gifts the battle-fanner
                   With no niggard hand distributes:
                   Scaldic honours are not measured
                   By the gifts bestowed on others.
                   The defender of his country,
                   And the best of all commanders,
                   With his own hand brings to Armód
                   This blood-candle, golden pointed.

One day during Yule the guests were looking at the tapestry. The Earl
said to Oddi the little: “Make a song about the workman’s handicraft on
the tapestry, and have it made by the time that I have finished my
stanza, and use none of the same words that are in mine.” The Earl sang:

                  The old one on the hangings standing,
                  Has a sheath-rod on his shoulder,
                  But, in spite of all his anger,
                  He will not get one step farther.

Oddi sang:

                   For a stroke himself prepares the
                   Warrior in stooping posture,
                   Where the tapestry is parted;
                   Yet his danger will be greatest.
                   Time it is for ships’ commanders
                   Peace to make ere harm does happen.

During Yule-tide, the Earl entertained Bishop William and many of his
chiefs. Then he made known his intention to go to Jórsalaheim
(Jerusalem), and requested the Bishop to go with him, because he was a
good Parisian scholar,[374] and the Earl wished him to be their
interpreter. The Bishop agreed to the Earl’s request, and promised to
go. The following chiefs went with Earl Rögnvald:—Magnus, the son of
Hávard, Gunni’s son; Swein, Hróald’s son; and the following men of
lesser note:—Thorgeir Skotakoll, Oddi the little, Thorberg Svarti, Armód
the scald, Thorkel Krókauga, Grímkell of Flettuness, and Bjarni his son.
When the two winters appointed for their preparations were passed, Earl
Rögnvald went early in the spring from the Orkneys east to Norway, to
see how far the Lendermen (Barons) had progressed with their
preparations; and when he came to Biörgvin, he found there Erling, Jón,
his brother-in-law, and Aslák, but Guttorm arrived shortly after. To
Biörgvin came also the ship which Jón Fót had caused to be built for the
Earl. It was a most exquisite piece of workmanship, and all ornamented.
The whole of the carved work on the prow, the vanes, and many other
parts of the ship, were gilt. Altogether, it was a most splendid ship.
Eindridi came frequently to town during the summer, and said he should
be ready in a week. The Earl’s men murmured greatly at having to wait so
long, and some proposed not to wait for him, saying that such voyages as
this had been made without Eindridi. A short time after Eindridi came to
town and said he was ready. Then the Earl commanded his men to set sail
when they thought there was favourable wind; and when the day came when
they thought they might expect a favourable wind, they left the town,
and set sail. The breeze was faint, and the Earl’s ship moved slowly,
because it required strong wind. The other chiefs lowered their sails,
and would not leave the Earl. When they were outside the Islands, the
breeze increased to such a degree that in the smaller vessels they had
to take in sail, but the Earl’s ship now went at a great speed. They saw
two large ships coming after them, and soon they passed them. One of
these two ships was highly finished. It was a dragon; both its head and
stem were richly gilded; it was white on the bows, and painted
everywhere above the sea where it was thought it would look well. The
Earl’s men said that was very likely Eindridi’s, adding: “He has not
kept well the agreement that no one should have an ornamented ship
except you, sire.”

The Earl replied: “Eindridi’s pride is great, and he may be excused for
not liking to be on the same level with us, as we are so much his
inferiors; but it is difficult to see whether his good fortune runs
before him or goes along with him. But let us not direct our movements
according to his hotheadedness.”

Eindridi soon passed them in the larger vessel, but the Earl kept all
his ships together, and had a successful voyage. They arrived all safe
in the Orkneys in the autumn.




                              CHAPTER LXXX

                  OF EARL ROGNVALD AND THE ORKNEYMEN.


IT was resolved that they should spend the winter there. Some lived at
their own expense, others were quartered with the Bœndr, and many were
with the Earl. There was a great turmoil in the Islands; the Orkneymen
and the Eastmen quarrelled frequently about bargains, and women, and
other things. The Earl had a very difficult task to keep peace among
them, for both parties considered that he deserved well of them and they
of him.


[Illustration: DRAGON SHIP OF THE VIKING PERIOD
(from Holmberg’s Nordbon i Hednatiden.)]


Of Eindridi it is to be told that when they came to Hjaltland (Shetland)
his fine ship was totally wrecked, and he lost a great quantity of
goods, but the smaller ship was saved. He spent the winter in Hjaltland,
and sent men to Norway to have another ship built for the voyage to the
East.

One of Eindridi’s crew was called Arni Spítulegg (stick-leg). He went to
the Orkneys during the winter with nine men. Arni was a very violent
man, daring and turbulent. He and his comrades lived at their own
expense during the winter. He bought malt and meat of a tenant of Swein,
Asleif’s son, and when he demanded payment Arni delayed to pay. When he
demanded it a second time, he was overwhelmed with abuse; and before
they parted Arni struck him with the back of his axe, saying, “Go and
tell your champion, Swein, whom you are always praising, to obtain
redress for you; you will need no more.” The man went and told Swein,
requesting him to obtain redress. He gave him a cold answer, and said he
would promise nothing. One day in the spring Swein went to collect his
rents. They were four together in a ten-oared boat. They had to pass the
island in which Arni was staying, and Swein said he would land there. It
was ebbing tide. Swein went on shore alone, carrying an axe with a short
handle, and no other weapon. He told his men to keep the boat from
getting aground. Arni Spítulegg and his comrades were lying in an
outhouse not far from the sea. Swein walked up, and found them indoors.
They greeted him. He acknowledged their greeting, and spoke to Arni,
saying that he should settle the farmer’s account. Arni replied that
there was plenty of time for that. Swein asked him to do it for his
intercession, but still Arni refused. Then Swein said he would not ask
any further, and at the same time he drove the axe into Arni’s skull, so
that the iron was buried in it, and he lost hold of the handle. Swein
ran out, and Arni’s companions after him, to the beach. As they ran fast
along the muddy shore, one of them, who was the swiftest, came to close
quarters with him. There were large roots of seaweed lying in the mud.
Swein seized one of them, and thrust it into the face of the man who had
come up with him, and he grasped at his eyes to clear the mud away, but
Swein escaped to his boat, and went home to Gáreksey. Shortly after he
went on his own business over to Caithness, and sent word to Earl
Rögnvald to settle the matter about Arni Spítulegg’s slaying. And when
the Earl received the message, he summoned together those who were
entitled to compensation for Arni, and settled the matter to their
satisfaction, he himself paying the compensation money. Many other acts
of violence perpetrated by the Eastmen and the Orkneymen during the
winter the Earl made good out of his own [funds].

Early in the spring he called a Thing meeting in Hrossey (Mainland), to
which came all the chiefs residing in his dominions. He then made it
known to them that he intended to leave the Orkneys and to go to
Jórsalaheim (Jerusalem), saying that he would leave the government in
the hands of his kinsman Harald, and praying all his friends to obey
him, and help him faithfully in whatever he required while he was
obliged to be away himself. Earl Harald was then nearly twenty, tall and
strong, but ugly; yet he was a wise man, and the people thought he would
be a good chief.

In the summer Earl Rögnvald prepared to leave the Orkneys; but the
summer was far advanced before he was ready, because he had to wait a
long time for Eindridi until his ship came from Norway. When they were
ready, they left the Orkneys in fifteen large ships. The following were
commanders of ships:—Earl Rögnvald; Erling Skakki; Bishop William;
Aslák, Erlend’s son; Guttorm; Magnus, Hávard’s son; Swein, Hróald’s son;
Eindridi Ungi; and the others who were with him are not named. From the
Orkneys they sailed to Scotland, and then to England, and when they
sailed to Nordymbraland (Northumberland), off the mouth of Hvera (the
Wear), Armód sang:

                 High the crests were of the billows
                 As we passed the mouth of Hvera;
                 Masts were bending, and the low land
                 Met the waves in long sand reaches;
                 Blind our eyes were with the salt spray
                 While the youths at home remaining,
                 From the Thing-field fare on horseback.

Then they sailed till they were south off England, and so on to
Valland.[375] There is no account of their voyage until they came to a
seaport called Verbon (Nerbon).[376] There they learned that the Earl
who had governed the city, and whose name was Geirbiörn, had lately
died; but left a young and beautiful daughter, by name Ermingerd. She
had charge of her patrimony, under the guardianship of her noblest
kinsmen. They advised the Queen to invite Earl Rögnvald to a splendid
banquet, saying that her fame would spread far if she gave a fitting
reception to noblemen arrived from such a distance. The Queen left it to
them; and when this had been resolved upon, men were sent to the Earl to
tell him that the Queen invited him to a banquet, with as many men as he
himself wished to accompany him. The Earl received her invitation
gratefully, selecting the best of his men to go with him. And when they
came to the banquet there was good cheer, and nothing was spared by
which the Earl might consider himself specially honoured. One day, while
the Earl sat at the feast, the Queen entered the hall, attended by many
ladies. She had in her hand a golden cup, and was arrayed in the finest
robes. She wore her hair loose, according to the custom of maidens, and
a golden diadem round her forehead. She poured out for the Earl, and the
maidens played for them. The Earl took her hand along with the cup, and
placed her beside him. They conversed during the day. The Earl sang:

                  Lady fair! thy form surpasses
                  All the loveliness of maidens,
                  Though arrayed in costly garments,
                  And adorned with precious jewels:
                  Silken curls in radiant splendour
                  Fall upon the beauteous shoulders
                  Of the goddess of the gold-rings.
                  The greedy eagle’s claws I redden’d.

The Earl stayed there a long time, and was well entertained. The
inhabitants of the city solicited him to take up his residence there,
saying that they were in favour of giving the Queen to him in marriage.
The Earl said he wished to complete his intended journey, but that he
would come there on his return, and then they might do what they thought
fit. Then the Earl left with his retinue, and sailed round Thrasness.
They had a fair wind, and sat and drank, and made themselves merry. The
Earl sang this song:

                  Long in the Prince’s memory
                  Ermingerda’s soft words shall linger;
                  It is her desire that we shall
                  Ride the waters out to Jordan;
                  But the riders of sea-horses,
                  From the southern climes returning,
                  Soon shall plough their way to Verbon
                  O’er the whale-pond in the autumn.

Then Armód sang:

                  Ne’er shall I see Ermingerda
                  More, from this time, if it be not
                  That my fate shall be propitious;
                  Many now are grieving for her.
                  Happy were I if I could but
                  Be beside her just for one day;
                  That, indeed, would be good fortune,
                  Once again to see her fair face.

Then Oddi sang:

                  Truth to tell, we two are scarcely
                  Worthy of fair Ermingerda;
                  For this wise and lovely Princess
                  May be called the Queen of Maidens:
                  This the title that beseemeth
                  Best the splendour of her beauty.
                  While she lives beneath the sun-ray,
                  May her lot be ever happy.

They went on till they came west to Galicialand,[377] five nights before
Yule-tide, and intended to spend it there. They asked the inhabitants
whether they were willing to sell them provisions; but food is scarce in
that country, and they thought it a great hardship to have to feed such
a numerous host. It so happened that the country was under the rule of a
foreigner, who resided in the castle, and oppressed the inhabitants
greatly. He made war on them if they did not do everything he wished,
and menaced them with violence and oppression. When the Earl asked the
inhabitants to sell him victuals, they consented to do so until Lent,
but made certain proposals on their part—to wit, that Earl Rögnvald
should attack their enemies, and should have all the money which he
might obtain from them. The Earl communicated this to his men, and asked
them what they would be inclined to do. Most of them were willing to
attack the castle, thinking that it was a very likely place to obtain
booty. Therefore Earl Rögnvald and his men agreed to the terms of the
inhabitants.

When the Yule-tide was close at hand the Earl called his men together,
and said: “We have been resting for a while, and have not disturbed the
men of the castle, and the inhabitants are getting tired of supplying
us. I suppose they will think our promise will come to nothing; and it
is not manly in us not to try to do what we promised. Now, I wish to
hear your advice as to how we are to take the castle, as I know you here
are men of great discretion; therefore I ask every one here present to
state what plan he thinks most likely to succeed.”

Erling replied to the Earl, and said: “I will not be silent since you
command us to speak, although I am not a man of sage counsels; and those
ought rather to be asked who have seen more and are more experienced in
such undertakings, as Eindridi Ungi. But I suppose we must do here as
the saying is, ‘Shoot at the bird before we catch it.’ I may try to give
some advice, whatever may be its value. If you and the other
ship-commanders do not think it a bad plan, we shall to-day go all of us
to the wood, and carry three bundles of faggots each to the castle,
because it appears to me that the lime would not stand well if much heat
were applied to it. Let us do this for the next three days, and see what
happens.”

They did as Erling advised, and when they had finished their work Yule
was close at hand. The Bishop would not permit the inhabitants of the
castle to be attacked during the Yule-tide.

The chief inhabiting the castle was named Gudifrey. He was a wise man,
and somewhat advanced in years. He was a good scholar, had travelled
much, and knew many languages. He was a covetous man, and overbearing.

When he saw what the strangers were doing, he called his men together,
and said: “The plan adopted by the Northmen seems to me a wise one, and
likely to do us great harm. We shall see, when fire is applied to the
stone wall round the castle, that it is not strong. Moreover, the
Northmen are valiant, and men of great strength, and we may expect a
fierce attack from them if they get an opportunity. Now, I wish to hear
your advice about the difficult position in which we are placed.”

But all his men asked him to do what he thought best.

Then he said: “My first plan is to tie ropes together, and you shall let
me down over the castle wall. I will dress myself in rags, and go to the
camp of the Northmen, and see what I can ascertain.”

They did as he told them, and he came to Earl Rögnvald pretending to be
a beggar, and speaking Valska, as they understood a little of it. He
walked throughout the camp and begged food. He perceived that there was
much jealousy among the Northmen, and that they were divided into two
factions. Eindridi Ungi was the leader of one, and the Earl of the
other.

Gudifrey went to Eindridi and spoke to him. He said that the chief of
the castle had sent him there, wishing to form an alliance with him. “He
expects that you will give him quarter if the castle is taken; and he is
more willing to let you have his treasure, if you will do this in
return, than those who wish to have him a dead man.”

Such things they spoke, and many others, but it was concealed from the
Earl, as at first they observed profound secrecy. When Gudifrey had been
some time with the Earl’s men, he returned to his castle. But they did
not remove their property from it, because they did not know whether the
attack would be successful, and they could not put faith in the
inhabitants.




                             CHAPTER LXXXI

                     EARL ROGNVALD TAKES A CASTLE.


THE tenth day of Yule-tide was a fine day, and Earl Rögnvald arose and
commanded his men to arm themselves, and summoned them with trumpets to
the attack of the castle. They dragged the wood close to it, and heaped
up large piles round the walls. Then the Earl gave orders where each
should make the attack. He himself with the Orkneymen had the attack
from the south, Erling and Aslák from the west, Jón and Guttorm from the
east, and Eindridi Ungi from the north. When they were ready for the
attack, they set fire to the wood, and the Earl sang:

                 Maids in lace and snow-white linen
                 Bring us here the white wine sparkling.
                 Fair to see was Ermingerda,
                 When we met her in our travels.
                 Fare we now to try the castle
                 With our flaming oaken firebrands;
                 Quickly leaping from the scabbard
                 Gleams the sharp-edged smiter. Forward!

Now they began to attack the castle vigorously, both with weapons and
with fire. They shot missiles into it, for that was the only way of
attack. The besieged did not stand firm on the walls, because they had
to guard themselves against the missiles. They poured down burning pitch
and brimstone, which, however, did very little harm to the Earl’s men.
What Erling had foretold came to pass; the lime could not stand the
fire, and the wall fell down, leaving large breaches open.

A man named Sigmund Ongul (fish-hook), the Earl’s stepson, was one of
the keenest in the attack, and frequently went in front of the Earl,
although he was then hardly a full-grown man. When the attack had lasted
for a while, all the besieged were driven from the wall. The wind blew
from the south, and drove all the smoke towards Eindridi, and when the
fire began to spread rapidly the Earl had water poured on it to cool the
burnt stones, and then there was a short pause in the attack. The Earl
sang a song:

                Now I mind me of the Yule-tide
                Which I spent with friends and brave men
                On the east of Agdir’s mountains,
                With the valiant warrior Sölmund;
                Now, again, another Yule-tide
                Am I in the same way busy
                At the south side of this castle,
                Adding to the din of weapons.

Further he sang:

                  Glad I was when that fair lady
                  Listened to my love-tale’s telling;
                  Hopelessly was I led captive
                  By a Valland maid in autumn.
                  Still I love the noble lady,
                  And I spread the feast for eagles.
                  Stone and lime, well bound together,
                  Now before me fall asunder.

Then Sigmund Ongul sang:

                 When, in spring-time, o’er the waters
                 Ye go homeward to the Orkneys,
                 Tell the lady whom I most love—
                 Lady of the splendid garments—
                 That, beneath the castle ramparts,
                 There was none who stepped more boldly
                 ’Mong the young men than her lover.

Then the Earl and Sigmund prepared to force their way into the castle,
and meeting with little resistance, they entered it, and many were
killed; but those that surrendered to the Earl received quarter. They
obtained a great deal of property, but did not find the chief, and
almost no treasure. There was a great discussion about the escape of
Gudifrey, and how he had effected it; and they soon suspected Eindridi
Ungi that he had given him the means of escaping, and that he had
followed the smoke, and thus gained the forest.

After this Earl Rögnvald and his men stayed a short time in Galicialand,
and directed their course along the west of Spain. They plundered far
and wide in heathen Spainland,[378] and obtained great booty. They went
into a certain village, but the villagers ran together and offered
fight. They made a stout resistance, but fled at last, when many of them
had been killed. The Earl sang:

                 When in Spainland I went fighting,
                 Quickly we o’erthrew the foemen,
                 For, when tired of our hard hewing,
                 Home they ran to see their sweethearts:
                 All the land was strewed with corpses.
                 Our deeds in song shall now be famous;
                 And my hope is, to be worthy
                 Of the lovely Ermingerda.

Then they sailed along the west of Spain, and were overtaken by a gale.
There they lay at anchor three days, and great waves broke over them, so
that the vessels nearly foundered. Then the Earl sang:

                 Here I’m storm-tossed, but undaunted,
                 While the cables hold together,
                 And the tackle of the vessel
                 Breaks not, as she breasts the billows;
                 I am promised to the fair one
                 Whom we left out in the North-land;
                 Now again there comes a fair wind;
                 Speed we on into the channel.

Then they set sail, and ran into Njörfasund[379] with a fair wind, and
Oddi sang:

                 When the faithful friend of heroes,
                 In the guest-hall sweet mead quaffing,
                 Sat beside the fair ring-giver,
                 That was a week to be remembered.
                 Now the splendid steeds of billows
                 Bear the noble-minded Rögnvald
                 And his warriors, wearing bucklers,
                 Quickly through the Sound of Njörfi.

When they were tacking into the Sound, the Earl sang:

                   By an east wind, breathing softly,
                   As from lips of Valland lady,
                   Are our ships now wafted onward,
                   As we push the yards out farther;
                   Though we had to tie the canvas
                   Tighter than we had expected
                   To the middle of the sailyard,
                   South off Spain—we bear away now.

They sailed through Njörfasund, and then the gale began to abate; and
when they had cleared the Sound, Eindridi Ungi parted from the Earl with
six ships, and sailed across the sea to Marselia (Marseilles), but Earl
Rögnvald and his men remained at the Sound. It was said that Eindridi
now himself proved that he had allowed Gudifrey to escape. The Earl’s
men sailed out to sea, and stood southwards to Serkland.[380] Then Earl
Rögnvald sang:

                 Now our good ship, land forsaking,
                 Laves her breast in limpid waters.
                 Long ere he who sings these verses,
                 Sees again the northern islands;
                 With the sharp prow I the yielding
                 Earth-surrounding sea am carving,
                 Far off Spain-land, sweeping southward.

More is not said of the Earl’s progress till they came south off
Serkland, and lay near Sardinia, not knowing where the land was. It was
very calm, and a thick fog spread over the water, so that they could
hardly see anything from the ships, and they sailed therefore slowly.
One morning the mist disappeared, and the crew arose and looked around
and saw two islets. When they looked for them the second time, there was
but one islet. This they told to the Earl. Then he said: “This cannot
have been islets which you have seen; it must be ships such as they have
in this part of the world, and which they call Drómundar.[381] From a
distance they look as big as holms. But where the other Drómund lay, a
puff of wind has probably swept over the water, and she has sailed away;
but they are likely some rovers.”

Then he summoned the Bishop and all the ship-commanders, and said: “I
ask of you my Lord Bishop, and Erling my kinsman, whether you see any
chance or device by which we may overcome those in the Drómund.”

The Bishop replied: “I think you will find it difficult to attack the
Drómund in your long-ships, for you will hardly be able to reach their
bulwarks with a boarding-pike, and they have probably brimstone and
boiling pitch to pour under your feet and over your heads. You may see,
Earl Rögnvald, wise as you are, that it would be the greatest rashness
to place yourself and your men in such jeopardy.”

Then Erling said: “My Lord Bishop, it may be that you are right in
thinking that we shall not obtain the victory by rowing at them; yet I
cannot help thinking that if we try to push close to the Drómund, their
missiles will fall beyond our ships lying close alongside; but if this
be not the case, we can push away quickly, for they will not be able to
chase us in the Drómund.”

The Earl said: “That is bravely spoken, and very much to my own mind. I
will now make it known to the ships’ commanders and all the men, that
every one may arm and prepare himself, each in his own place, as well as
he can. Then let us attack them, and if they are Christian merchants, we
can make peace with them; but if they are heathens, which I think they
are, by the favour of Almighty God we shall be able to overcome them,
but of the booty we obtain we shall give every fiftieth penny to the
poor.”

Then they unfastened their arms, prepared the bulwarks of their ships
for battle, and made themselves ready in other ways as their
circumstances permitted. The Earl assigned to each vessel its place in
the attack; then they pulled vigorously onwards.




                             CHAPTER LXXXII

                     RÖGNVALD CONQUERS THE DRÓMUND.


WHEN the men in the Drómund saw the ships pulling towards them, to
attack them, they spread fine clothing and costly stuffs out on the
bulwarks, and made a great shouting, which the Earl’s men took as a
challenge. Earl Rögnvald brought his ship close under the stem of the
Drómund, on the starboard side. Erling did the same on the larboard
side. Jón and Aslák brought theirs under her bows, and the others
amidships on either side, all sticking as close to her as possible. But
when they came close under the Drómund, she was so high in the side that
the Northmen were unable to use their weapons, and the others poured
blazing brimstone and burning pitch over them; but most of it fell
outside the ships, as Erling had foreseen, and they had no need to
shield themselves from it. However, when the attack did not succeed, the
Bishop moved away his ship and two others, and they told off their
bowmen to go in them. After having got to a convenient distance for
shooting, they shot their arrows into the Drómund, and this was the most
effective mode of attack. The men in the Drómund protected themselves
with their shields, and paid little heed to what those were doing who
were in the ships close under the Drómund.

Earl Rögnvald then ordered his men to take their axes, and cut the
planks of the Drómund, where the iron fastenings were fewest; and when
the men in the other ships saw what the Earl’s men were doing, they did
the same. Now, where Erling had stationed himself, there was a large
anchor hanging from the Drómund, which had its fluke hooked over the
gunwale, but the shank hung down towards Erling’s ship. One of his
forecastle men was named Andun Raudi (red); he was lifted up on the
anchor-stock, and then he pulled up others. Standing there as close as
they could, they hacked away at the planks with all their might; and
this was far higher than the others could reach. When they had made an
opening large enough to admit them, they prepared to board the Drómund.
The Earl and his men entered on the lower deck, and Erling and his men
on the upper; and when they both got in, there began to be severe
fighting. Those in the Drómund were Saracens, whom we call Mahometan
infidels. There were also many black men, who withstood them most
fiercely. Erling received a severe wound in the neck, near the shoulder,
when he jumped on board; it healed so badly that he carried his head to
a side ever after, and therefore he was called crick-neck (Skakki).

When Earl Rögnvald and Erling joined each other, the Saracens were
driven to the forepart of the ship; and the Earl’s men boarded one after
another until they were more numerous, and then they pressed the enemy
hard. In the Drómund they saw one man far superior to the others in
appearance and stature, and they were persuaded that he must be their
chief. Earl Rögnvald ordered his men not to wound him, if they could
seize him in any other way. Then they surrounded him, and pressed him
with their shields, and thus caught him. He and a few others with him
were sent to the Bishop’s ship. All the rest they killed, and obtained
great booty and many precious things. When they had finished the hardest
part of their work, they sat down and rested, and the Earl sang:

               At the spreading of the banner,
               Erling, mighty tree of battle,
               Went to victory and honour
               Foremost when we fought the Drómund;
               Then we felled the black-skinned fighters;
               Everywhere the blood ran streaming,
               And the keen-edged swords were reddened
               As we hewed among the heathen.

               We have had our fill of slaughter,
               Round us lie the heaps of corpses;
               Gory swords have been red-painting
               At the Drómund all this morning;
               Soon the news will spread to northward
               Of this furious sword-tempest;
               It will soon be known at Verbon,
               How we dealt death-blows this morning.

There was much talk about what had been done; every one told what he had
seen. Then they talked of who had been the first to board, but were not
all of one opinion. Some said it would not be creditable to them if they
did not all relate this great exploit in the same way. At last they all
agreed to let Earl Rögnvald decide, and every one should afterwards tell
the story in the same way as he did. Then the Earl sang:

                Audun Raudi was the man who
                First, with energy and valour,
                Scaled the black sides of the Drómund;
                Soon the brave one seized his booty.
                By the help of God’s good favour
                Have we overcome the heathen;
                Steeped our swords are all in red blood;
                Round us lie the sable corpses.

When they had cleared the Drómund, they set it on fire. When the big man
whom they had taken prisoner saw this, he changed colour and became
pale, and could not keep himself still. But though they tried to make
him speak, he did not say a word, neither did he make any kind of sign;
he was immovable to fair promises and menaces alike. But when the
Drómund began to blaze up, they saw a glowing stream, as it were, run
into the sea. At this the captive man was greatly moved. They concluded
that they had not made a careful search for the money, and now the
metal, whether gold or silver, had melted in the fire.

Then Earl Rögnvald and his men sailed south, under Serkland, and lay off
a certain town of Serkland, and had seven nights’ truce with the men of
the town, and sold them silver and other valuables. No one would buy the
big man; and then the Earl gave him leave to go away with four men. He
came back on the morning after, with his men, and told them that he was
a nobleman of Serkland, and that he had been ransomed from there with
the Drómund and all its contents. “It grieved me most,” he said, “that
you should burn it, and thus destroy so much treasure, without any one’s
having the benefit of it. Now you are in my power, but it counts for
your benefit with me that you spared my life, and did me such honour as
you could. But I would gladly never see you again, and now may you live
hale and well.” Then he rode away into the country.

Earl Rögnvald sailed to Crete, and anchored in a strong gale. When Armod
kept watch during the night, he sang:

                   Lie we now, where stormy billows
                   Break above the sturdy bulwarks;
                   My lot is to keep the watch well,
                   On this wave-surmounting seahorse;
                   While the lads are snugly sleeping,
                   I, to Crete, look o’er my shoulder.

They lay off Crete until they had fair wind to Jórsalir (Jerusalem), and
arrived early on a Friday morning at Akursborg (Acre). They went on
shore with great pomp and splendour, such as seldom had been seen there.
Thorbiörn Svarti sang:

                    Oft have I, with comrades hardy,
                    Been in battle, in the Orkneys,
                    When the feeder of the people
                    Led his forces to the combat.
                    Now our trusty Earl we follow,
                    As we carry up our bucklers
                    Gaily to the gates of Acre
                    On this joyful Friday morning.

They stayed in Akursborg for a while, and a disease broke out among
their men, of which many died. Thorbiörn Svarti died there. Oddi Litli
sang:

               Bravely bore the Baron’s vessels
               Thorbiörn Svarti, scald and comrade,
               As he trod the sea-king’s highway,
               Round by Thrasness, south to Acre.
               There I saw them heap the grave-mould
               Of the High Church o’er the King’s friend.
               Earth and stones now lies he under
               In that southern land of sunshine.

Earl Rögnvald and his men left Akursborg, and visited all the holiest
places of Jorsalaland. They went all to Jordan and bathed. Earl Rögnvald
and Sigmund Ongul swam across the river, and went to some shrubs and
tied large knots.[382] The Earl sang:

                 Long the way is I have travelled
                 To this heath, enclosed by deserts,
                 And the wise maid will remember,
                 Too, my crossing over Jordan.
                 Seems to me, that those who tarry
                 At their homesteads, will not find it
                 A short journey here to travel.
                 Warm the blood falls on the wide plain.

Then Sigmund sang:

                  This day I have tied a strong knot
                  For the churlish clown that’s sitting
                  By the home-hearth; ’tis no falsehood
                  That we play him now a fine trick.

The Earl sang:

                  On this feast-day of St. Lawrence,
                  Tie we knots for this fine fellow.
                  Tired I came to this nice corner,
                  Where the shrubs grow close together.

And when they were going from Jorsalaland Earl Rögnvald sang:

               From the scald’s neck hangs the cross now,
               In his hand a palm he carries.
               Now should cease unkindly feelings:
               From the heights my men rush downwards.

During the summer Earl Rögnvald and his men left Jorsalaland, and were
going to Mikligard. In the autumn they came to a town called
Imbolum,[383] and stayed there a long time. When two persons met where
the street was crowded, and one of them thought it necessary to go to
one side, he cried out to the other, “Midway, midway!” One evening the
Earl’s men, among whom was Erling Skakki, walked from the town, and on
the bridge leading to the ship, some inhabitants of the town met them,
and cried out, “Midway, midway!” Erling was very drunk, and pretended
not to hear it; and when they met, he jumped from the bridge into the
mud; his men ran to his assistance, and dragged him out, and had to
undress him completely. Next morning, when the Earl saw him, and was
told what had happened, he smiled and sang:

                  Bad the luck my friend has met with;
                  In the mud he tumbled, splashing;
                  As he would not cry out “Midway!”
                  Loudly, like the foreign people.
                  I suppose the prince’s brother,
                  When upset, looked rather rueful.
                  Black the mud that on the ground is
                  In Imbol, as Erling knoweth.

Some time after, it happened that they came from the town very drunk,
and Jón Fót was missed by his men, and no one else was missing. They
sent immediately to the other ships to search for him, but he was not
found. They could not search for him on shore during the night; but in
the morning, when it was daylight, they found him murdered under the
wall of the town; but it was never known who had slain him. They buried
him honourably at a holy church, and then they went away, and came north
to Ægisness,[384] and there they waited some nights for a fair wind to
sail to Mikligard. They made their ships look splendidly, and sailed
with great pomp, as they knew Sigurd Jorsalafari had done. While they
were crossing the sea northward the Earl sang this song:

                  Let us ride the sea-king’s horses,
                  Leave the plough in field untouched.
                  As we drive the wet prows onward
                  All the way to Mikligard.
                  There we’ll take the royal bounty,
                  Paid for wielding well our weapons,
                  While we fill the wolf’s red palate,
                  And on battlefields win honour.




                            CHAPTER LXXXIII.

                           OF EARL RÖGNVALD.


RÖGNVALD and his men came to Mikligard, and were well received by the
Emperor and the Væringiar.[385] At this time Menelaus, whom we call
Manuli,[386] was the Emperor of Mikligard. He gave them a great deal of
money, and offered them pay if they would stay there permanently. They
spent there a great part of the winter. Eindridi Ungi was there when
they came, and was highly honoured by the Emperor. He had little to do
with the Earl and his men, but rather spoke slightingly of them to
others. Rögnvald commenced his journey from Mikligard during the winter,
and went first to Dýraksborg[387] in Bólgaraland. From there they sailed
west to Púll.[388] Earl Rögnvald, Erling, Bishop William, and most
others of their noblest men left their ships there, procured horses, and
rode first to Rómaborg (Rome), and then from Róm until they came to
Denmark. From there they went to Norway, where the people were glad to
see them. This journey became very famous, and all those who had made it
were considered greater men afterwards than before.

Ogmund Dreng, Erling Skakki’s brother, had died while they were away;
while both were alive, he was considered the greater of the two. After
the death of King Ingi, Magnus, the son of Erling and Kristín, the
daughter of Sigurd Jorsalafari, was made King, but the government of
Norway was in the hands of Erling alone. Valdimar, King of the Danes,
gave him the title of Earl, and he became a great chief. Eindridi came
from the south some winters after Earl Rögnvald, and went to King
Eystein, because he would not have anything to do with Erling. But after
King Eystein’s death Eindridi and Sigurd, the son of Hávard Höld of
Reyr, raised a party, and made Hákon Herdabreid,[389] the son of King
Sigurd, son of Harald Gilli, their king. They slew Gregorius Dag’s son
and King Ingi. Eindridi and Hákon fought with Erling, under Sekkr,[390]
where Hákon was killed; but Eindridi fled. Earl Erling had Eindridi Ungi
killed some time after in Vik.[391]

Earl Rögnvald spent the summer in Hördaland, in Norway, and heard many
tidings from the Orkneys. There were great disturbances there, and most
of the chiefs were divided into two factions, few remaining neutral.
Earl Harald was at the head of one of these factions, and Earl Erlend
and Swein, Asleif’s son, of the other. When the Earl heard this, he
sang:

                   Though the most part of my nobles
                   Have forgot the oaths they sware me
                   (Such the wickedness of men is),
                   Yet will their designs be thwarted.
                   Traitors plotting in my absence,
                   Will not by it grow more loyal;
                   Slow but sure shall be my motto
                   While a beard on chin I carry.

The Earl had no ships, but he asked his kinsmen and friends to build
some long-ships for him during the winter. They gave a favourable
answer, and consented to everything he proposed, and built the ships.




                             CHAPTER LXXXIV

                   EARL RÖGNVALD GOES TO THE ORKNEYS.


IN the summer the Earl made himself ready to go west to his dominions in
the Orkneys, but it was late before he was ready, because many things
kept him back. He went to the west in a merchant-vessel belonging to
Thórhall, Asgrím’s son, an Icelander of a noble family, who had a farm
south in Biskupstungur.[392] The Earl had a numerous train of noblemen
on board the vessel. When they came to Scotland the winter was far
advanced, and they lay at Torfnes.[393] The Earl arrived in his
dominions shortly before Yule.




                             CHAPTER LXXXV

                KING EYSTEIN TAKES EARL HARALD PRISONER.


NOW we have to tell what happened in the Orkneys while Earl Rögnvald was
away. The same summer that the Earl went on his journey, King Eystein,
son of Harald Gilli, arrived from Norway with a numerous army, which he
had landed at Rínarsey.[394] He heard that Earl Harald had gone over to
Caithness in a ship of twenty benches, with eighty men, and lay then at
Thórsá. When King Eystein heard of him, he manned three boats, and
crossed the Pentland Firth, going westward, and on to Thórsá. When he
arrived there the Earl and his men did not know anything of them until
the King’s men boarded the ship, and took the Earl prisoner. He was
brought before the King, and the result was that the Earl ransomed
himself with three marks of gold, and surrendered his dominions to King
Eystein, so that he should hold them from him in the future. Then he
became King Eystein’s man, and confirmed their compact with oaths. From
there King Eystein went to Scotland, and ravaged there during the
summer. During this expedition he plundered in many parts of England,
considering that he was taking revenge for King Harald, Sigurd’s
son.[395]




                             CHAPTER LXXXVI

                            OF KING EYSTEIN.


THEN King Eystein returned to his kingdom, and his expedition was
variously thought of. Earl Harald remained in his dominions in the
Orkneys, and most of the inhabitants were satisfied with his rule. At
this time his father, Earl Maddad, was dead; but his mother, Margarét,
had gone to the Orkneys. She was a handsome woman,[396] but a virago. At
this time David, the King of Scots, died, and his son Malcolm[397] was
made king. He was quite a child when he succeeded his father.




                            CHAPTER LXXXVII.

                            OF EARL HARALD.


ERLEND, the son of Harald Sléttmáli, spent most of his time in Thórsá.
Sometimes he was in the Sudreyar, or on war expeditions, after the death
of Earl Ottar. He was a very promising man, and accomplished in most
things, liberal in money, gentle, open to advice, and greatly loved by
his men. He had a large following.

There was a man named Anakol, who had fostered Erlend, and to his
counsels he chiefly listened. He was of a noble family, and hardy. He
was Earl Erlend’s right-hand man.

When Earl Rögnvald had left his dominions to go to Jórsalaheim, Erlend
went to Malcolm,[398] the King of Scots, and requested him to give him
an Earl’s title, and Caithness for his support, as his father Earl
Erlend had. And because Erlend had many friends, and Malcolm was a child
in years, it was brought about that he bestowed the title of Earl on
Erlend, and gave him the half of Caithness jointly with his kinsman
Harald. Then Erlend went to Caithness to see his friends.

After that he gathered troops together, went out to the Orkneys, and
sought to be accepted by the inhabitants. When Earl Harald, Maddad’s
son, heard this, he gathered troops together, and had many men. Some
parties went between the kinsmen and tried to make peace between them.
Erlend asked for half of the Islands jointly with Earl Harald, but Earl
Harald refused to give them up. Truce was, however, made between them
for that year; and it was resolved that Erlend should go to the east and
see the King of Norway, and ask for that half which belonged to Earl
Rögnvald, which Earl Harald said he would surrender. Then Erlend went
east to Norway, but Anakol and some of his party remained behind.

Gunni, Olaf’s son, the brother of Swein, Asleif’s son, had children by
Margarét, Earl Harald’s mother, but Earl Harald had banished him, and
therefore enmity arose between him and Swein. The latter sent his
brother Gunni south to Liódhús (Lewis) to his friend Liótólf, with whom
he had been staying himself. Fugl, the son of Liótólf, was with Earl
Harald, and there was therefore coldness between him and Swein. When
Earl Erlend went east to Norway, Earl Harald went over to Caithness, and
resided at Vík (Wick) during the winter. Swein, Asleif’s son, was then
at Thrasvík (Freswick), in Caithness, and took care of the estate which
his stepsons had there, for his former wife was Ragnhild, Ingimund’s
daughter, though they lived but a short time together. Their son was
Olaf. After that he married Ingirid, Thorkel’s daughter. Their son was
Andreas.

On Wednesday in Passion week Swein went with some others to Lambaborg.
They saw a transport vessel coming from the north across the Pentland
Firth, and Swein concluded that they were Earl Harald’s men whom he had
sent to collect his revenues (scat) in Hjaltland. Swein ordered his men
to take a boat and attack the barge, which they did. They seized all its
cargo, and put Earl Harald’s men on shore, and they went to Vík (Wick)
and told him. Earl Harald did not say much to this, yet he said: “Swein
and I shall have our turns.” He distributed his men to be entertained
during Easter. The Caithnessmen called this—that the Earl was in
guest-quarters.




                           CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

                        OF SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON.


IMMEDIATELY after Easter week, Swein, Asleif’s son, went with a barge
and a boat rowed by oars to the Orkneys; and when they came to Skálpeid
(Scapa), they took there a ship from Fugl, Liótólf’s son. He was coming
from his father at Liódhús (Lewis), and was going to Earl Harald. During
the same trip they took twelve ounces of gold from Sigurd Klaufi, a
housecarl of Earl Harald’s. This money had been left at the homestead,
but the owners were in Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall). Then Swein went over to
Ness (Caithness), and up through Scotland. He found Malcolm,[399] King
of Scots, who was then nine winters old, in Apardion (Aberdeen). Swein
spent a month there, and was well entertained. The King of Scots
insisted upon his enjoying all those emoluments of Caithness which he
had before he became Earl Harald’s enemy.




                             CHAPTER LXXXIX

                          OF SWEIN AND ANAKOL.


AFTER this Swein prepared to go away, and the King of Scots and he
parted very good friends. Then Swein went to his ships, and sailed from
the south to the Orkneys. Anakol was at Dýrness when Swein sailed from
the south, and they saw them sailing east off Múli.[400] They sent
Gauti, a bondi of Skeggbjarnarstadir,[401] to Swein, and Anakol
requested him to come to terms with Fugl about the seizure of the ship,
because Anakol and Fugl were related to each other. When Gauti found
Swein, and told him Anakol’s message, he sent a messenger back to
Anakol, asking him to go to Sandey, that they might meet there, because
he (Swein) had to be there himself. They had a peaceful meeting there,
and came to terms; and the result was that Swein should make the award
as he liked himself. After that Anakol formed an alliance with Swein,
and bound himself to make peace between Swein and Earl Erlend, when he
came from the east—for they were bitter enemies on account of the
burning of Frákork. Swein and Anakol went to Striónsey, and lay off
Hofsness[402] some nights. At this time Thorfinn Bessason lived at
Striónsey. His wife was Ingigerd, Swein’s sister, who had been deserted
by Thorbiörn Klerk.




                               CHAPTER XC

              THE RECONCILIATION OF EARL ERLEND AND SWEIN.


WHEN Swein and Anakol were lying off Hofsness, Earl Erlend arrived there
from Norway. Anakol and Thorfinn endeavoured to reconcile him to Swein,
but he gave an unfavourable answer, saying that Swein had always been
opposed to his kinsmen, and had not kept the agreement between him and
Earl Ottar, that he should help him to the dominion. Then Swein offered
the Earl his support, and they were negotiating the whole day; yet the
Earl would not be reconciled until Anakol and Thorfinn declared that
they would follow Swein from Orkney if the Earl would not make peace
with him. Earl Erlend then told the message from King Eystein, that he
should have that part of the Orkneys which had formerly been held by
Earl Harald.

When they had made peace, Swein gave the advice that they should go to
Earl Harald before he heard this from others, and ask him to surrender
the dominion. Swein’s advice was acted upon. They found Earl Harald on
board his ship, off Kjárekstadir.[403]

It was in the evening of Michaelsmas that Harald and his men saw
long-ships approaching, and suspecting them to be enemies, they ran from
the ships into the castle. There was a man named Arni, Rafn’s son, who
ran from Earl Harald’s ship to Kirkiuvag. He was so frightened that he
forgot that he had his shield at his shoulder until it stuck fast in the
door. Earl Erlend and Swein ran from their ships, and pursued Earl
Harald to the castle, and attacked them both with arms and fire. The
assailed defended themselves bravely, until night parted them. Many were
wounded on both sides, and Harald and his men would soon have been
exhausted if the attack had lasted longer. The next morning the Bœndr
and their mutual friends arrived, and tried to make peace between them.
Earl Erlend and Swein were very reluctant to make peace. In the end,
however, they agreed, on condition that Harald should swear to let Earl
Erlend have his part of the Islands, and never demand it from him. These
oaths were made in the presence of the best men in the Islands.

After that Earl Harald went over to Ness (Caithness), and to his friends
in Scotland, accompanied by only a few men from the Orkneys.

Earl Erlend and Swein called together a Thing-meeting with the Bœndr in
Kirkiuvag, and they arrived from all the Islands. Earl Erlend pleaded
his cause, saying that King Eystein had given him that part of the
Orkneys of which Earl Harald had charge, and he requested the Bœndr to
receive him, showing them King Eystein’s letters, which proved his
words. Swein, and many others of his friends and kinsmen, spoke in
favour of the Earl; and at last the Bœndr promised obedience to Earl
Erlend. Then he took possession of all the islands, and became ruler
over them. It was an agreement between Earl Erlend and the Bœndr that he
should not hinder Earl Rögnvald from taking possession of that part of
the islands which belonged to him, if it should be granted him to come
back; but if Earl Rögnvald should demand more than one-half of the
islands, they should help Earl Erlend to resist his claims. Swein,
Asleif’s son, was frequently with Earl Erlend, and asked him to be on
his guard, and not to trust Earl Harald or the Scots. The most part of
the winter they were on board their ships, and had scouts on the
look-out. Towards Yule-tide the weather began to grow boisterous, and
Swein went home to his estate in Gáreksey, and asked the Earl not to
relax his vigilance though they parted, and the Earl did so. He remained
on board his ships, and had nowhere a Yule feast prepared for him in the
Islands.




                              CHAPTER XCI

             EARL HARALD COMES UNPERCEIVED TO THE ORKNEYS.


THE eleventh day of Yule-tide, it happened in Gáreksey that Swein was
sitting at his drink with his men. Rubbing his nose, he said: “I think
Earl Harald is now on his way to the Islands.”

His men replied that this was unlikely, on account of the strong gales
prevailing at that time.

He replied: “I know such is your opinion, and I shall not therefore send
intelligence to the Earl now, merely on the strength of my presentiment;
yet I suspect it is necessary.” Then the subject was dropped, and they
went on drinking as before.

Earl Harald commenced his voyage to the Orkneys during Yule-tide. He had
four ships, and a hundred men. Two nights he lay under Gáreksey
(Grimsey?). They landed in Hafnarvag,[404] in Hrossey, and the
thirteenth day of Yule-tide they walked to Fiörd (Firth). They spent the
Yule-holiday at Orkahaug.[405] There two of their men were seized with
madness, which retarded their journey. It was near day when they came to
Fiörd (Firth). There they learned that Earl Erlend was on board his
ship, but that he had been drinking during that day at a house on shore.
There Harald and his men killed two men—one was named Ketill, the name
of the other is not mentioned—and made four prisoners: Arnfinn, Anakol’s
brother, another man called Liótólf, and two others. Harald and
Thorbiörn Klerk returned to Thórsá; the brothers Benedict and Eirík went
to Lambaborg, taking Arnfinn with them.

As soon as Earl Erlend became aware of the enemy, he sent men during the
night to Gáreksey to tell Swein. He pushed out his boats immediately,
and went to see Earl Erlend, according to the message, and they stayed
on board the ships a great part of the winter. Benedict and his brother
sent word that Arnfinn would not be liberated unless Earl Erlend sent
them back their ship which had been seized off Kjárekstadir. The Earl
was willing to give up the ship, but Anakol dissuaded him from it,
saying that Arnfinn would get away without this sacrifice.

On the Wednesday before Lent, Anakol and Thorstein, Ragna’s son, went
over by night to Ness (Caithness) in a boat with twenty men. They hauled
the boat ashore under a cliff in a hidden creek. Then they went up and
hid themselves in some copsewood a short distance from Thrasvík
(Freswick). They had fitted up the boat in such a way that the men
seemed to be each in his place. Some men had come past the boat in the
morning, and had not suspected anything.

Anakol and his men saw some men rowing from the borg[406] and landing at
the river-mouth.[407] Then they saw a man riding from the borg, and
another walking, whom they recognised to be Eirík. Then they divided
themselves into two parties. Ten went along the river down to the sea,
to prevent them from getting to the boat; other ten went to the hamlet.
Eirík came a short time before them to the hamlet, and walked towards
the drinking-hall. Then he heard armed men moving about, and ran into
the hall, and out through another door, and down to his boat; but there
he came upon men who seized him, and brought him out to the Islands to
Earl Erlend. Then messengers were sent to Earl Harald to tell him that
Eirík would not be liberated until Arnfinn and his companions came safe
to Erlend. And the wishes of both were complied with.




                              CHAPTER XCII

           THE RECONCILIATION OF THE EARLS HARALD AND ERLEND.


IN the spring Earl Harald prepared to go from Caithness north to
Hjaltland. His intention was to take the life of Erlend Ungi, who had
wooed his mother Margarét, although the Earl (Harald) had refused him.
Then Erlend gathered men together, and carried her off from the Orkneys,
and took her north to Hjaltland, took up his residence in
Moseyarborg,[408] and made great preparations (for defence). When the
Earl (Harald) came to Hjaltland, he besieged the borg, and cut off all
communication; but it was difficult to take it by assault, and men went
between them and tried to reconcile them. Erlend asked the Earl to give
him the woman in marriage, and in return he offered to assist the Earl,
saying it was of greater consequence for him to recover his dominions
than this, and it would be advisable for him to make as many friends as
he could. Many spoke in favour of Erlend’s proposal; and the result was
that they made peace, and Erlend married Margarét. Then he became an
ally of Earl Harald, and during the summer they both went east to
Norway.

When these tidings came to Orkney, Earl Erlend and his men laid their
plans. Swein counselled to go on a harrying raid to obtain booty. This
they did, and went south to Breidafiord,[409] and made inroads on the
east of Scotland. They went south to Beruvík (Berwick-on-Tweed). There
was a man named Knút the wealthy, who was a merchant, and always resided
in Beruvík. Swein and Erlend seized a large and fine vessel belonging to
Knút. On board was a valuable cargo, and Knút’s wife. Then they sailed
south to Bl['y]hólmar.[410] Knút was at Beruvík when he heard of the
plunder. He induced the Beruvík men for a hundred marks of silver to try
to recover the goods. Of those who went in pursuit most were merchants.
They went in fourteen ships to search for them. When Earl Erlend and
Swein were lying under Bl['y]hólmar, Swein said in the night that they
should sleep without awnings, saying that he expected that the Beruvík
men might come upon them during the night in great numbers. A gale was
blowing, and no heed was paid to Swein’s words, and they slept under the
awnings, except in Swein’s ship, where there was no awning abaft the
mast. Swein was sitting on a chest in a fur coat, saying that he wished
to be ready during the night.

One of Swein’s crew was called Einar Skeif. He said that Swein’s bravery
was much talked of, that he was called a bolder man than others, but now
he dared not have awnings on board his ship. Watchmen were on shore in
the island. Swein, hearing that they did not agree about what they saw,
went up to them and asked what they were disputing about? They said they
were not sure what it was that they saw. Swein had keener sight than any
of his men, and when he looked he saw fourteen ships approaching them
from the north. Then he went on board his ship again, and told his men
to wake up and take down the awnings, and then a great outcry arose,
every one asking Swein what they should do. He told them to be silent,
and said that his advice was to moor the ships between the island and
the mainland, adding: “We shall see whether they do not pass by us, and
if they do we shall part; but if they attack us, we shall row against
them as vigorously as possible, and let us make a stout resistance if we
meet.”

Others spoke against this plan, saying the only way was to sail from
them, and so they did.

Swein said: “If you wish to sail away, then stand out to sea.” Swein was
not so soon ready as the others, but Anakol waited for him. Swein’s ship
was, however, a swifter sailer, and he took in sail and waited for
Anakol, not wishing him to be left behind in a single ship. When they
stood off, with all sail set, Einar Skeif said: “Swein, does our ship
stand still?”

Swein replied: “I do not think so; but I advise you not to question my
courage any more, since through your fright you cannot tell whether the
ship moves or stands still, yet it is one of the swiftest sailers.”

They put in under Mosey,[411] and Swein sent men to Eidinaborg to tell
the King of Scots of his plunder; but before they came to the town they
met twelve men on horseback who had saddle-bags filled with silver, and
when they met they inquired after Swein, Asleif’s son. The others told
where he was, and asked what they wanted with him. The Scots said they
had been told that Swein was taken prisoner, and the King of Scots had
sent them to ransom him. Thus they told their errand.

The King did not make much of Knút’s loss, but sent a costly shield to
Swein, and other presents besides.

Earl Erlend and Swein arrived rather late in the Orkneys in the autumn.
This summer Earl Harald went east to Norway. At the same time, Earl
Rögnvald and Erling Skakki came to Norway from Mikligard, and he arrived
at his dominions in the Orkneys shortly before Yule.




                             CHAPTER XCIII

              PEACE BETWEEN EARL RÖGNVALD AND EARL ERLEND.


THEN there went men immediately between Earl Erlend and Earl Rögnvald,
and tried to make peace between them, the Bœndr pleading the agreement
they had come to with Earl Erlend, that he should not prevent Earl
Rögnvald from taking possession of his part of the Islands. A conference
took place between the Earls at Kirkiuvag (Kirkwall), and at that
conference they confirmed their peace with oaths. It was two nights
before Yule when they made peace, and the terms were, that they should
each have one-half of the Islands, and both should defend them against
Earl Harald or any other if he claimed them. Earl Rögnvald had no ships
till his own came from the east in the summer. This winter all was
quiet, but in the spring the Earls prepared their plans in case Earl
Harald should come from the east. Earl Erlend went to Hjaltland to
intercept him if he should come there. Earl Rögnvald went over to
Thórsá, because Earl Harald was expected to go there if he came from the
east, as he had there many friends and kinsmen. Earl Erlend and Swein
were in Hjaltland during the summer, and kept back all ships, so that
none went to Norway.

In summer Earl Harald left Norway with seven ships, and landed in the
Orkneys. Three of the ships, however, were driven by stress of weather
to Hjaltland, and these were seized by Swein and Earl Erlend. When Earl
Harald came to the Orkneys he heard of the agreement of Earl Rögnvald
and Earl Erlend, that each of them should have one-half of the Islands;
and then he saw that no territory was intended for him. He resolved to
go over to Ness (Caithness) to Earl Rögnvald before Earl Erlend and
Swein came from the east. They were in Hjaltland, when they heard that
Earl Harald had arrived in the Orkneys with five long-ships, and
prepared to go thither immediately. In Dynröst[412] they had strong
currents and severe gales, and there they parted. Swein was driven back
to Fridarey (Fair Isle), with twelve ships, and they thought the Earl
had perished. From Fridarey they went to Sandey, where they found Earl
Erlend with three ships. It was a joyful meeting for them. Then they
went to Hrossey (Mainland), and inquired about Earl Harald’s movements.




                              CHAPTER XCIV

                          PEACE IS TALKED OF.


NOW it is to be told that Earl Harald came to Thórsá with six ships.
Earl Rögnvald was in Sutherland, at the wedding of his daughter Ingirid,
whom he married to Eirík Slagbrellir. He heard immediately that Earl
Harald had arrived at Thórsá, and rode from Beruvík[413] to Thórsá,
attended by many men. Eirík was related to Earl Harald; and with many
others he tried to make peace between them, saying that it was absurd
for them to be at enmity, because of their relationship, their
up-bringing, and their long alliance. At last matters came so far that a
meeting was appointed, and truce made. They should meet in a certain
castle at Thórsá,[414] and talk together alone; but an equal number of
their men should be outside the castle. They talked a long time, and
agreed very well. They had not seen each other since Rögnvald returned.
Late in the day information was given to Earl Rögnvald that Earl
Harald’s men were coming there armed. Earl Harald said that no harm
would be done. Then they heard heavy blows outside, and ran out.
Thorbiörn Klerk had arrived there with a large party, and attacked
Rögnvald’s men immediately. The Earls called to them that they should
not fight. Then the inhabitants of the town came running to the spot to
separate them. Thirteen of Earl Rögnvald’s men were killed, and he
himself was wounded in the face.




                              CHAPTER XCV

                             SWEIN’S PLANS.


AFTER this their friends made an effort to establish peace between them,
and the result was that they made peace, which they confirmed by oaths.
They renewed their alliance, pledging their faith and shaking hands; and
it was resolved that they should go that very night out to the Orkneys
to attack Earl Erlend. They went out on the Pentland Firth with ten
ships, taking the course to Rínarsey.[415] They landed in Vidivag,[416]
and went on shore. Erlend and his men lay on board their ships in
Bardvik,[417] and from there they saw a crowd on Rögnvaldsey, and sent
out spies. When they heard of the reconciliation of the Earls, it was
also said that Earl Erlend would not be permitted to plunder on shore,
or to obtain provisions in any other way; and their intention was to
prevent them from getting any food in the island. Earl Erlend held a
meeting and consulted his men, and they agreed to leave it to Swein to
say what should be done. Swein replied that they should sail that very
night over to Caithness, saying that they had no strength to contend
with both the Earls there in the Islands. He gave out that they intended
to go to the Sudreyar (Hebrides), and winter there.

It was Michaelmas-eve when they sailed out on the Firth, but when they
came over to Ness (Caithness), they ran up into the country, and drove
down a great number of cattle, which they brought on board their ships.
There were strong currents and bad weather, so that the Firth was
frequently impassable; but when favourable weather came, Swein sent a
man in a boat from Ness, to give information that Earl Erlend had made a
great strand-hewing[418] in Caithness, and was ready to sail to the
Sudreyar when there was a favourable wind. When this came to the ears of
Earl Rögnvald, he called his men together and made a speech to them,
telling them to be on their guard, to be wary, and sleep every night on
board their ships; “For now,” he said, “Swein may be expected every hour
in the Islands; the more certainly the more he talks of going away.”

Early in the winter Earl Erlend and Swein left Thórsá, and took their
course by the west of Scotland. They had six large long-ships, all well
manned. They had to row, and when they had gone some distance from
Caithness, Earl Rögnvald’s spies went out to the Islands, and told him
the news. Then the Earls moved their ships to Skálpeid (Scapa), and Earl
Rögnvald wished them to stay a while on board.

When Swein and Erlend came west off Staur,[419] the former said that
they should not distress themselves by rowing any farther, and asked his
men to put the ships about and set the sails. This action on the part of
Swein was thought foolish, yet his men did as he desired them. When they
had been sailing for a while the ships began to speed, because there was
a fine breeze, and nothing is said of their voyage until they came to
Vagaland,[420] in Orkney. There they heard that the Earls were lying at
Skálpeid, off Knarrarstadir,[421] with thirteen ships. There were Erlend
Ungi, Eirík Slagbrellir, and many other men of note. Thorbiörn Klerk had
gone out to Papuley,[422] to Hákon Karl, his brother-in-law. It was four
nights before Simon’s-mas when Swein, Asleif’s son, decided to attack
the Earls during the night, but it was thought rather hazardous, as
their followers were so much more numerous. Yet Swein insisted on having
his own way; and so he did, because the Earl wished to follow his
advice.




                              CHAPTER XCVI

                    BATTLE BETWEEN THE THREE EARLS.


DURING the night there fell a shower of sleet, and Earl Rögnvald left
his ship with six men, intending to go to his residence at Jórfiara
(Orphir), because he expected no danger. During the shower they came to
Knarrarstadir. An Icelander, by name Bótólf Begla, an excellent skald,
lived there. He pressed Earl Rögnvald with many invitations to stay
there during the night. Earl Rögnvald and his men entered the house;
their clothes were pulled off them, and they went to sleep; but Bótólf
was to keep watch. This same night Earl Erlend and Swein attacked Earl
Harald and his men, and took them by surprise, and they knew of nothing
till they heard the battle-cry. They flew to arms, and defended
themselves bravely. Many were killed, and the attack ended in this
way—that Earl Harald leaped on shore when there were only five men left
in his ship. Bjarni, brother of Erlend Ungi, a noble man, fell there,
and a hundred men with him; and a great number were wounded. All the
Earl’s men jumped from the ships to reach the shore, and fled. Few of
Earl Erlend’s men were killed, and they took fourteen ships belonging to
the Earls, with all the valuables they contained. When the most part of
their work was done, they heard that Earl Rögnvald had left his ship the
evening before, and walked first to Knarrarstadir, and thither they
went. Bondi Bótólf was outside the door when they came, and greeted them
well. They asked whether Earl Rögnvald was there. Bótólf said he had
been there during the night. They became very violent, and demanded
where the Earl was then, saying that he no doubt knew where he was. He
pointed with his hand behind the farm-yard, and sang:

                 This way went the Prince a-fowling;
                 Skilful are his men with arrows.
                 Now is many a heathcock meeting
                 Death beside the verdant hillocks,
                 Where the elmbow of the hunter,
                 Keenly bent, as if by magic,
                 Makes the moorfowl quickly perish.
                 The Prince’s sword the land defendeth.

The Earl’s men ran away from the homestead, and he who could run fastest
considered himself luckiest, as he would be the first to catch Earl
Rögnvald. Bótólf went into the house, awoke the Earl, and told him what
had happened during the night, and also what the Earl’s men were doing.
Rögnvald and his men started up instantly, and put on their clothes;
then they went away to the Earl’s residence at Jórfiara; and when they
came there they found Earl Harald in hiding. The Earls [Harald and
Rögnvald] went immediately over to Ness each in a separate boat; one had
two men, the other three. All their men went over to Ness, wherever they
could get a boat.

Earl Erlend and Swein took the ships belonging to the Earl, and a great
quantity of other property. Swein took for his share all Earl Rögnvald’s
treasures that were in his ship, and sent them to him over to Ness.
Swein advised Earl Erlend to move his ships out to Vagaland (Walls), and
to lie in the Firth, where they could see ships coming from Ness, as he
thought it would be convenient to run out upon them if there was
opportunity. But Earl Erlend yielded to the persuasions of his men that
they should go north to Daminsey (Damsey), and in a large castle there
they drank all day, but fastened the ships together every night, and
slept on board. Thus time passed on till the Yule-feast.




                             CHAPTER XCVII

                          EARL ERLEND’S DEATH.


FIVE nights before Christmas, Swein, Asleif’s son, went east to
Sandvik,[423] to his kinswoman Sigríd, because he had to make peace
between her and her neighbour by name Björn. Before he went away he told
Earl Erlend to sleep on board by night, and not to be less on his guard
that he himself was absent. Swein spent one night with his kinswoman
Sigríd. A tenant and dear friend of Sigríd’s, by name Gisl, asked Swein
to stay with him, as he had been brewing ale, and wished to entertain
him. When they came to Gisl they were told that Earl Erlend had not gone
on board that night; and as soon as Swein heard it, he sent Margad,
Grim’s son, and two other men to the Earl, and asked him to pay heed to
his advice, although he had not done so the preceding night, and then he
added: “I suspect that I shall not have long to provide for this Earl.”

Margad and his companions found Earl Erlend, and told him Swein’s words.
The Earl’s men said: “He is a strange man; sometimes he is afraid of
nothing, at other times he is so frightened that he does not know where
to look for shelter to himself or others.” They said they would sleep
quietly on shore, and not go on board. The Earl said they should do as
Swein advised them, and he went on board with four-and-twenty men; the
others slept at a house. Margad went to another creek, not far away.
This very night the Earls Rögnvald and Harald surprised Earl Erlend, and
neither the watchmen who kept guard on the island nor those on board the
ship perceived them until they were climbing on board. A man named Orm
and another Ufi were in the forepart of the Earl’s ship. Ufi jumped up
and tried to rouse the Earl, but could not, for he was dead-drunk. Then
he took him in his arms, and jumped overboard with him into a boat
alongside the ship, and Orm jumped overboard on the other side, and
escaped on shore. There Earl Erlend was slain, and most of those on
board. Margad and his men were awakened during the night by the
battle-cry, and took to their oars, and rowed round the headland. It was
clear moonlight, and they saw when the Earls went away; and they felt
sure that fate had decided between them. They rowed away first to
Rennadal (Rendale), and sent men to Swein, Asleif’s son, to tell him
what they had seen. Earl Harald wished to give Earl Erlend’s men peace,
but Earl Rögnvald wished to wait, in order to know whether the Earl’s
body would be found or not. The body was found two nights before Yule. A
spear was seen standing in a heap of seaweed; and that spear was fast in
Earl Erlend’s body.[424] Then it was brought to church, and peace was
given to the Earl’s men, as well as to four of Swein’s men who had been
taken.

A man named Jón Vœng was a sister’s son of that Jón Vœng who was
mentioned before.[425] He had been with Hákon Karl, and had a child by
his sister; then he ran away, and was with Anakol on piratical
expeditions; but now he was with Erlend, yet he was not in the battle.
All Erlend’s men went to Kirkiuvag, and took refuge in St. Magnus’s
church. The Earls went there, and a meeting for peace-making was held in
the church. The Earls would not pardon Jón until he promised to marry
the woman. All the men swore oaths of fealty to the Earls, and Jón Vœng
became Earl Harald’s steward.




                             CHAPTER XCVIII

                          SWEIN SLAYS ERLEND.


AFTER Earl Erlend’s death Swein, Asleif’s son, went to Rennadal
(Rendale), and there he saw Margad, who was able to give him all the
tidings of what happened in Daminsey. Then Swein went to Hrólfsey
(Rousay), and arrived there at high-water. He and his men brought all
the tackle of the ships on shore, and placed it in safety. They divided
themselves among the farms, and kept watch on the movements of the Earls
and other chiefs. Swein, Asleif’s son, mounted the hill with five men,
and went down to the sea on the other side; they hid themselves at the
homestead in the darkness, and heard a great talking. There were
Thorfinn, his son Ogmund, and their brother-in-law Erlend.[426] He
boasted of having given Earl Erlend the death-blow, and all of them were
declaring they had done right well. When Swein heard this, he and his
companions went in upon them. Swein was quickest, and immediately dealt
Erlend a death-blow. They took Thorfinn prisoner, and brought him away;
but Ogmund was wounded. Swein went to Thingavöll,[427] to his father’s
brother Helgi; and there they spent the first days of Yule in hiding.
Earl Rögnvald went to Daminsey, but Earl Harald was at Kirkiuvag during
Yule-tide. Earl Rögnvald sent men to Thingavöll, to Helgi, and asked him
to tell his kinsman Swein, if he knew anything of his whereabouts, that
Earl Rögnvald invited him to spend the Yule with him, and he would try
to make peace between him and Earl Harald. When Swein received this
message, he went to Earl Rögnvald, and remained with him during the rest
of the Yule-tide, and was well treated.




                              CHAPTER XCIX

                OF EARL HARALD AND SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON.


AFTER Christmas a meeting was appointed to make peace between the Earls
and Swein, when they should finally settle all matters about which
reconciliation had been made. When they met, Earl Rögnvald took great
pains to make peace between them. Others, however, who were not Swein’s
friends or kinsmen, spoke against him, saying that he would always be
causing disturbances if he were not expelled from the Islands. At last,
however, they agreed upon this—that Swein should pay a mark of gold to
each of the Earls, and should keep one-half of his estates and a good
long-ship.

When Swein heard the award, he replied: “Our agreement will be good only
in case I am not oppressed.”

Earl Rögnvald would not accept the payment from Swein, saying that he
would in no way oppress him, as he considered his faithfulness and
friendship worth more than money.

After the peace-meeting, Earl Harald went to Gáreksey, and used Swein’s
corn and other property rather wastefully. When Swein heard this he
complained of his loss to Earl Rögnvald, and said, that “this was a
breach of their agreement, and that he would go home to look after his
property.”

Earl Rögnvald said: “Stay with me, Swein: I shall send a message to Earl
Harald, for he will be more than a match for you to deal with, strong
and brave as you are.”

Swein was not to be dissuaded, and went with ten men in a boat to
Gáreksey, and arrived there late in the evening. They went behind the
houses, and Swein wished to set fire to the hall, and burn down the
homestead, and the Earl within it. A man named Swein, Blákári’s son, the
most notable of Swein’s companions, dissuaded him from doing so, saying
that the Earl was not perhaps in the homestead; and if he was there, he
would neither permit Swein’s wife nor his daughter to go out, and it was
never to be thought of to burn them. Then they went up to the door, and
into the entry. Those who were inside the hall jumped up and closed the
door, and then Swein and his men became aware that the Earl was not in
the house. Those who were within soon ceased resisting, surrendered
their weapons to Swein, and went out unarmed. Swein gave quarter to all
Earl Harald’s men. He poured out all his beer, and took away his wife
and daughter. He asked his wife Ingirid where Earl Harald was, but she
would not tell him. He then said: “Say nothing then, but point to where
he is.” She would not do that either, because she was related to the
Earl. Swein gave up some of the arms, when they came on board the ships.
But the effect of this was that their agreement of peace was at an end.

Earl Harald had gone out to a certain island to hunt hares.[428] Swein
went to Hellisey.[429] It rises abruptly from the sea, and there is a
large cave in the cliffs, the mouth of which is flooded at high-water.
When the Earl’s men got their weapons from Swein, they went to Earl
Harald and informed him of these doings of Swein’s. The Earl had his
ship set afloat, and ordered his men to row after him. He said: “This
time our meeting with Swein shall be decisive.” Then they rowed in
pursuit of him, and soon they saw and recognised each other.

When Swein saw that they gained on him, he said: “We must devise some
scheme, because I do not care to meet the Earl with so great odds
against me as I suspect there are. Let us go to the cave and see how we
fare.”

When Swein came to the cave it was ebb tide. They hauled up the boat
into the cave, which ran into the cliff, and the water rose before the
mouth of the cave. During the day Earl Harald and his men searched for
Swein throughout the island, and did not find him, neither did they see
any boat leave the island. They wondered very much at this, as they
thought it unlikely that Swein’s boat had gone down. They rowed round
the island in search of the boat, but did not find it. Then they
concluded that he must have gone to some of the other islands, and they
went where they thought it most likely. It so happened that, when the
Earl rowed away, the tide was back from the mouth of the cave. Swein had
overheard the talk between the Earl and his men. He left his own boat in
the cave, and took a small boat which the monks[430] had, and went to
Sandey. There they landed, and pushed off the small boat, which drifted
about till it was wrecked. They came to a homestead called
Völuness,[431] where a man lived by name Bárd, who was Swein’s kinsman.
They made themselves known to him secretly, and Swein said he wished to
stay there. Bárd said he might do as he liked, but that he dared not
keep him here unless in hiding. They went in, and sat by themselves in a
part of the house separated from the other inmates by a partition-wall.
There was a secret door to it, filled up with loose stones. That evening
Jón Vœng, Earl Harald’s steward, arrived there with six men, and Bárd
received them well. Large fires were made, at which they warmed
themselves. Jón was excited, and spoke of the dealings of Swein and the
Earls. He blamed Swein very much, said he was a truce-breaker, and
faithful to no one. He had lately made peace with Earl Harald, and yet
he went to attack him and burn him in the house, adding that there would
never be peace in the land till Swein was banished from it. Bárd and
Jón’s companions put in some words in Swein’s defence. Then Jón began to
blame Earl Erlend, saying there was no loss in his death, as he was a
violent man, and nobody could live in safety for him. When Swein heard
this, he could not restrain himself, but seized his weapons, and ran to
the secret door. He pushed the stones down, thus making a great noise.
Swein’s design was to leap before the hall-door. Jón was sitting in his
shirt and linen breeches, and when he heard Swein coming he tied on his
shoes and sprang out from the fire and away from the house. The night
was pitch dark, and it was hard frost. During the night he came to
another farm. His feet were very much frost-bitten, and some of his toes
fell off. Through the intercession of Bárd, Swein gave peace to Jón’s
companions. He remained there during the night, but in the morning he
and his men went away in a boat belonging to Bárd, which he gave to him.
They went south to Bardsvík,[432] and stayed in a certain cave.
Sometimes Swein took his meals at a house during the day, but slept
during the night down by his boat, and thus he guarded himself against
his enemies.




                               CHAPTER C

                         OF ROGNVALD AND SWEIN.


ONE morning early Swein and his men saw a large long-ship coming from
Hrólfsey (Hrossey?) to Rögnvaldsey,[433] and Swein recognised it
immediately as Earl Rögnvald’s ship, which he used to command himself.
They put in at Rögnvaldsey, where Swein’s boat was lying, and five of
them went on shore. Swein and his men were on a certain headland, and
threw stones at the Earl’s men. When those on board saw this, they drew
forth their arms; and when that was seen by Swein, they ran down to the
beach, and pushed their boat afloat, and jumped into it. The long-ship
stuck fast on the beach. When they rowed past it, Swein was standing up
with a spear in his hand. When Earl Rögnvald perceived it, he took a
shield and held it before him, but Swein did not throw the spear. When
the Earl saw that they would get away from them, he ordered a
truce-shield to be held aloft, and asked Swein to go on shore. When
Swein saw this, he told his men to put to land, saying that it was his
greatest satisfaction to be at peace with Earl Rögnvald.




                               CHAPTER CI

                       OF EARL HARALD AND SWEIN.


THEN Earl Rögnvald and Swein went on shore, and had a long conversation
by themselves, and agreed very well. While they were talking, they saw
Earl Harald sailing from Caithness to Vagaland (Walls), and when the
ship approached the island, Swein asked what was to be done. The Earl
said Swein should go over to Ness immediately. This was during Lent.
They left Rögnvaldsey at the same time. The Earl went to Hrossey,[434]
but Swein went west to Straumsey (Stroma). Earl Harald saw the boat, and
thought he recognised it as Swein’s, and went immediately into the Firth
in pursuit. When Swein saw the pursuit, they left the boat, and hid
themselves. When Earl Harald came to Straumsey (Stroma) he saw the boat,
and suspected that the men were somewhere near, and would not therefore
go on shore. A man named Amundi, the son of Hnefi, who was Earl Harald’s
friend, and father’s brother to Swein, Asleif’s son’s stepchildren, went
between them, and succeeded so far that they agreed to keep the
agreement of peace which they had made the previous winter. A gale
arose, and they were both obliged to remain there during the night, and
Amundi put Earl Harald and Swein in the same bed, and many of their men
slept in the same house.

After this Swein went over to Ness (Caithness), and Earl Harald to the
Orkneys. Swein heard that the Earl had said that their agreement to be
at peace had been rather loose. He paid little heed to this, however,
and went south to Dalir, and spent the Easter there with his friend
Sumarlidi; but Earl Harald went north to Hjaltland, and was there a long
time during the spring.

After Easter Swein went from the south, and met on his way two of Jón
Vœng’s brothers—one was called Bunu-Pétr, the other Blán. Swein and his
men seized them, and took from them all their goods, and brought them to
land. A gallows was erected for them, and when everything was ready
Swein said they should be allowed to run up the country, adding that
they were greater shame to their brother Jón alive than dead. They were
a long time out on the hills, and when they came to some habitations
they were very much frost-bitten.

From thence Swein went to Liódhús, in the Sudreyar, and stayed there
some time. When Jón Vœng heard that Swein had taken his brothers
prisoners, and not knowing what he had done with them, he went to Eyin
Helga (Enhallow), and took Olaf, the son of Swein, Asleif’s son, and
Kolbein Hruga’s foster-son, and brought him to Westrey. They met Earl
Rögnvald at Hreppisnes,[435] and when he saw Olaf, he said: “Why are you
here, Olaf?”

He said: “It is the work of Jón Vœng.”

The Earl looked to Jón, and said: “Why did you bring Olaf here?”

He replied: “Swein took my brothers, and I don’t know but he may have
killed them.”

The Earl said: “Take him back again as quickly as you can, and do not
dare to do him any harm, whatever may have become of your brothers, for
if you do, you will not be safe in the Islands from either Swein or
Kolbein.”




                              CHAPTER CII

                           OF EARL RÖGNVALD.


AFTER Easter Swein commenced a journey to the Sudreyar, taking with him
sixty men. He went to the Orkneys, and landed first in Hrólfsey
(Rousay). There they took a man, by name Hákon Karl,[436] who had been
with Earl Harald when Earl Erlend was slain. Hákon ransomed himself with
three marks of gold, and thus saved himself from Swein. In Hrólfsey
Swein found the ship which the Earls had taken from him, and two of the
planks were cut, which had been done by Earl Rögnvald’s order, because
Swein had refused to buy it or to accept it as a gift from the Earls.
Swein went from there to Hrossey, and met Earl Rögnvald at Birgishérad
(Birsay). The Earl received him well, and Swein spent the spring with
him. Earl Rögnvald said that he had ordered the planks of the ship to be
cut, because he did not wish him to row about rashly among the Islands
when he came from the Sudreyar. Earl Harald came from Hjaltland in the
spring during the Whitsuntide, and when he came to the Orkneys Earl
Rögnvald sent men to him to say that he wished the compact of peace
between him and Swein to be renewed, and a peace meeting was appointed
in St. Magnus’s church on Friday during the holy week. Earl Rögnvald
carried a broad axe to the meeting, and Swein went with him. Then the
peace compact which had been made in the winter was confirmed.




                              CHAPTER CIII

                        OF SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON.


THEN Earl Rögnvald gave Earl Harald the ship which had belonged to
Swein, but all other things which had been awarded him from Swein he
returned to him. Earl Rögnvald and Swein were standing at the
church-door while the sail, which had been lying in St. Magnus’s church,
was carried out, and Swein looked rather gloomy. The following Saturday,
after noontide service, Earl Harald’s men came to Swein, Asleif’s son,
and said the Earl wished him to come to speak with him. Swein consulted
Earl Rögnvald, but he did not say much in favour of his going, and added
that one did not know whom to trust. Swein went, nevertheless, with five
men. The Earl was sitting on a cross bench in a small room, and
Thorbiörn Klerk beside him. A few other men were with the Earl, and they
sat for a while and drank. Then Thorbiörn left the room, and Swein’s
companions said to him that they distrusted the Earl’s conduct very
much. Thorbiörn returned shortly after, and presented Swein with a
scarlet tunic and a cloak, saying that he did not know whether he would
call it a gift, because these things had been taken from Swein in the
winter. Swein accepted the gifts. Earl Harald restored to him the
long-ship which had belonged to him, and the half of his property and
estates. He asked him to stay with him, and said their friendship should
never be dissolved. Swein accepted all this gladly, and went immediately
the same night and told Earl Rögnvald how matters had turned out between
him and Earl Harald. Earl Rögnvald said he was much pleased with this,
and told Swein to take care that they did not become enemies again.




                              CHAPTER CIV

                             OF THE EARLS.


A SHORT time after, the three chiefs—Swein, Thorbiörn, and Eirik—went
out on a plundering expedition. They went first to the Sudreyar, and all
along the west to the Syllingar, where they gained a great victory in
Maríuhöfn[437] on Columba’s-mas (9th June), and took much booty. Then
they returned to the Orkneys.

When the Earls Harald and Rögnvald had made peace with Swein, Asleif’s
son, they were always together, and Earl Rögnvald governed, but they
agreed very well. When they came home from the Syllingar, Thorbiörn
Klerk went to Earl Harald, and became his counsellor. Swein went home to
Gáreksey, and resided there during the winter with many men, living upon
his booty, and other stores which he possessed there in the Islands. He
was most attached to Earl Rögnvald. Every summer he was out on marauding
expeditions. It was said that Thorbiörn did not improve the harmony
between Earl Harald and Earl Rögnvald.

Thórarinn Killinef was one of Earl Rögnvald’s men, a great friend of
his, and was always with the Earl. A man named Thorkel was one of
Thorbiörn Klerk’s followers, and a friend of his. Thórarinn and Thorkel
quarrelled over their drink at Kirkiuvag, and Thorkel wounded Thórarinn,
and then escaped to Thorbiörn. Thórarinn’s companions pursued Thorkel,
but Thorbiörn and his men defended themselves in a loft. The Earls were
informed of this, and they went to part them. Thorbiörn refused to leave
the decision of this case to Earl Rögnvald, as it was his men that were
concerned in the pursuit. When Thórarinn had recovered from his wounds,
he slew Thorkel as he was going to church. He ran into the church, but
Thorbiörn and his men pursued him. Earl Rögnvald was told what was
happening, and he went there with his men, and asked Thorbiörn whether
he was going to break the church open. Thorbiörn said the church ought
not to shelter him who was within. Earl Rögnvald said there should be no
violation of the church at this time, and Thorbiörn was pushed away from
it. No agreement was come to about this case.

Thorbiörn went over to Caithness, and was there for a while. Then many
things happened to estrange them, for Thorbiörn was often guilty of
violence to women, and of manslaying. He went secretly out to the
Orkneys in a boat with thirty men, and landed at Skálpeid, and walked to
Kirkiuvag with three men. In the evening he went alone into an inn where
Thórarinn was drinking, and struck him a death-blow immediately. Then he
ran out into the darkness and far away. For this the Earl made him an
outlaw in every part of his dominions. Thorbiörn went over to Ness, and
remained in hiding with his brother-in-law, Hösvir, who was called the
strong. He had married Thorbiörn’s sister, Ragnhild, and their son was
Stefán Rádgiafi (counsellor), Thorbiörn’s follower. Shortly afterwards
Thorbiörn went to Malcolm, King of Scots, and remained there a while, in
high favour with the King. There was a man called Gillaodran with the
King of Scots. He was of a great family, but a violent man. He had
incurred the displeasure of the King of Scots for violent acts and
manslaughters which he had committed in his kingdom. He fled to the
Orkneys, and the Earls received him. Then he went to Caithness, and
acted as a steward for the Earls. There was a noble Bondi in Caithness,
by name Helgi, a friend of Earl Rögnvald’s. Gillaodran quarrelled with
him about the stewardship, and Gillaodran attacked and killed him. After
the slaughter he went west to Scotland’s Fiord, and was received by a
chief named Sumarlidi Höld,[438] who had possessions in Dalir, on
Scotland’s Fiord. His wife was Ragnhild, the daughter of Olaf Bitling
(little bit), King of the Sudreyar. Their sons were King Dufgall,
Rögnvald, and Engull.[439] They were called the Dalverja family.

Earl Rögnvald sent for Swein, Asleif’s son, before he went out on his
expedition. When they met, Earl Rögnvald asked him to have an eye on
Gillaodran if he had an opportunity. Swein said he did not know how far
he might succeed.




                               CHAPTER CV

                         SWEIN SLAYS SUMARLIDI.


THEN Swein went on a marauding expedition, having five long-ships. When
he came west to Scotland’s Fiord, he heard that Sumarlidi Höld had gone
on board a ship, and was about to set out on an expedition. He had seven
ships, and Gillaodran commanded one. He had gone into the firths to
bring up some troops that had not arrived. When Swein heard of
Sumarlidi, he gave him battle, and it was a fierce fight. Sumarlidi Höld
was killed in that fight, and many men with him. When Swein became aware
that Gillaodran was not there, he went in search of him, and slew him in
Myrkvifiörd,[440] and fifty men with him. Then he went on his
expedition, and returned home in the autumn, as his custom was. He went
to see Earl Rögnvald soon after his return, and he was much pleased with
these deeds.




                              CHAPTER CVI

                   OF EARL RÖGNVALD AND EARL HARALD.


EVERY summer the Earls were wont to go over to Caithness, and up into
the forests to hunt the red-deer or the reindeer.[441] Thorbiörn Klerk
was with the King of Scots, and sometimes he went to Caithness and
stayed in hiding with his friends. He had three friends in Caithness
whom he trusted most. One was his brother-in-law, Hösvir; the second,
Liótólf, who lived in Thórsdal; and the third was Hallvard, Dúfa’s son,
in Kálfadal (Calder), at a certain promontory off Thórsdal. All these
were his intimate friends.




                              CHAPTER CVII

                     THE SLAYING OF EARL RÖGNVALD.


WHEN Earl Rögnvald had been an Earl two-and-twenty winters from the time
that Earl Paul was taken prisoner, the Earls went over to Caithness
during the latter part of the summer as usual, and when they came to
Thórsá they heard a rumour to the effect that Thorbiörn was there in
hiding with not a few men, and that he intended to attack them if he had
an opportunity. Then the Earls called men together, and went with a
hundred men, twenty of whom were on horseback and the rest on foot. In
the evening they went up into the valley,[442] and took up their
quarters for the night. When they were sitting by the fire in the
evening, Earl Rögnvald sneezed very much. Earl Harald said: “That was a
loud sneeze, kinsman.” In the morning they went along the valley.

During the day Earl Rögnvald rode always ahead of his men, and a man
with him called Asólf, and another by name Jómar, his kinsman. They rode
five together along Kálfadal; and when they came to the farm, farmer
Höskuld was on the top of a corn-stack piling up the corn, which his
servants brought to him. Earl Harald was some distance behind. When
Höskuld recognised Earl Rögnvald, he saluted him by name, and asked for
news, speaking very loud, so that he could be heard far away. This was a
short distance from the sitting-room of the house. The homestead stood
on an eminence, and one had to go through narrow and very steep passages
up to it. Thorbiörn was at this farm, and was sitting indoors drinking.
The passages led to the end of the house close to the gable, which had a
door filled loosely with stones. Thorbiörn and his men, hearing the
words of Höskuld when he saluted Earl Rögnvald, seized their weapons,
pushed the stones from the concealed door, and ran out. Thorbiörn ran
round the gable, and on to the wall of the passage. The Earl was then
close to the door. Thorbiörn struck at him, and Asólf warded off the
blow with his hand, and it was cut off; and then the sword touched the
Earl’s chin, inflicting a great wound.

On receiving the blow Asólf said: “Let them serve the Earl better who
have to thank him for greater gifts.” He was then eighteen winters old,
and had lately entered the Earl’s service.

Earl Rögnvald was going to jump off his horse, and his foot stuck fast
in the stirrup. At that moment Stefán arrived and stabbed him with a
spear; and Thorbiörn wounded him again; but Jómar stabbed Thorbiörn in
the thigh, the spear entering the bowels. Then Thorbiörn and his men ran
behind the homestead, and down a steep bank, into a wet morass. Then
Earl Harald and his men arrived and met Thorbiörn. They recognised each
other, and the Earl’s men, when they knew his intentions, advised to
pursue him; but Earl Harald dissuaded them from it, saying that he
wished to wait for Earl Rögnvald’s opinion, “Because,” said he, “I am
very intimately connected with Thorbiörn, as you know, both through
relationship and other ties.”

Those who were with Earl Rögnvald stood sorrowing over his dead body,
and some time passed before Earl Harald heard the news. Thorbiörn and
his men had got out on the bog, and across the moss-hag running along
it. But through the urgency of the Earl’s followers, he and his men ran
down to the bog, and they met at the moss-hag—the two parties standing
one on either side. Thorbiörn’s party defended themselves from the bank,
and his followers ran to his assistance from the neighbouring
homesteads, until they were fifty in number. They defended themselves
bravely, for they had a strong position. The moss-hag was both deep and
broad, and the bog was soft; so they could only hurl spears at each
other. Thorbiörn told his men to throw none back; and when the Earl’s
party had exhausted their missiles they spoke to each other, and
Thorbiörn called to Earl Harald, saying, “Kinsman! I wish to ask you to
give me quarter, and I am willing to leave the decision of this case
entirely in your hands. I will reserve nothing which may contribute to
your honour. I also think, kinsman, you must remember that there have
been quarrels in which you would not have made such a difference between
Earl Rögnvald and me that you would have killed me for having done this
deed, when he had you under his thumb, and left you no more power than
if you had been his page; but I gave you the best gifts, and endeavoured
to further your honour in every way I could. The deed which I have
committed is indeed a great crime, and weighs heavily upon me, but the
whole of his dominions revert to you. You may also know that Earl
Rögnvald intended for me the same fate which he met at my hands. And I
suspect, kinsman, that if it had so happened that I were dead, and Earl
Rögnvald alive, you would not have quarrelled with him; and yet you wish
to take away my life.”

Thorbiörn urged his case with many fair words, and many pleaded for him,
and begged that quarter might be given him. And at last, when so many
pleaded, the Earl began to listen to them.

Then Magnus, the son of Gunni, Hávard’s son, a chief and a kinsman of
the Earl’s, and the noblest born of Earl Harald’s followers, took speech
as follows:—“We are not able to counsel you, Earl, after these great
deeds, but I shall tell you what will be said if quarter is given to
Thorbiörn when he has done such a deed, and even dared to say to your
face, almost in so many words, that he has done this wickedness in your
interest, or for your honour; and it will be an everlasting shame and
dishonour to you and to all the Earl’s kinsmen if he is not avenged. I
think Earl Rögnvald’s friends will believe it to be the truth that for a
long time you have been planning his death, and that it is your plan
which has now been accomplished. Do you think he will acquit you from
complicity in his guilt when he has to defend himself; since no one says
a word for you when he tells you to your face that he has committed this
crime in your interest? And how can you better confirm this suspicion
than by now granting him peace? I have resolved, for my part, never to
give him quarter, if any doughty men are willing to follow me, whether
you like it or not.”

His brother Thorstein, and Hákon, and Swein, Hróald’s son, spoke to the
same effect. Then they left the Earl and went along by the moss-hag,
trying to find a place where they might cross.

When Thorbiörn saw Magnus and his followers walking along the moss-hag,
he said: “Now, I suppose, they must have disagreed in their counsels;
the Earl has wished to give me peace, and Magnus has spoken against it.”

While they were thus talking, Thorbiörn and his men went farther away
from the moss-hag.

Harald’s party stood on the brink, and when he saw that no quarter would
be given, he leapt across in full armour, though it was nine ells[443]
broad. His followers leapt after him, but none of them were able to leap
so far; and most of them caught the bank and crawled up out of the mud.

Thorbiörn’s men urged him to advance against Magnus and his men, and
decide the matter with them; but he said: “I think the best plan is,
that each of you do what he thinks likely to be best, but I shall go to
Earl Harald.”

Most of his men dissuaded him from this, and begged him rather to flee
to the woods and save himself. He did not, however, accept that advice.
Then his followers left him, and tried to save themselves in various
ways, and at last there were eight men only with Thorbiörn. When he saw
that Earl Harald had crossed the ditch, he went to him and fell on his
knees, saying that he brought his head to him. Many of the Earl’s men
asked that peace might be given him; and the Earl said: “Save yourself,
Thorbiörn; I have not the heart to kill you.”

While they were talking, they moved down the valley along
Kalfadalsá,[444] and Magnus’s party pursued them. When the Earl saw it,
he said: “Save yourself, Thorbiörn, I will not fight for you against my
men.” Then Thorbiörn and his men left the Earl’s party, and went to some
deserted shielings called Asgrím’s ærgin.[445] Magnus’s party pursued
them, and set the buildings on fire immediately. Thorbiörn and his men
defended themselves bravely; and when the buildings began to fall down
with the burning, they went out and were attacked by the other party
with their weapons, as soon as they could reach them. They were already
very much exhausted by the fire, and fell there all nine. When
Thorbiörn’s wounds were examined, it was found that the intestines
protruded through the wound inflicted by Jómar. Earl Harald led his men
down the valley, but those who were with Magnus went to Fors (Forss),
wrapped up Earl Rögnvald’s body, and brought it down to Thórsá.




                             CHAPTER CVIII

                  THE REMOVAL OF EARL RÖGNVALD’S BODY.


EARL RÖGNVALD KALI died five nights after the summer Marymas.[446] Earl
Harald brought the body with a splendid following to the Orkneys, and it
was buried at the Magnus Kirk; and there it rested until God manifested
Rögnvald’s merits by many and great miracles. Then Bishop Bjarni had his
holy remains exhumed with the permission of the Pope.[447] Where the
blood of the Earl fell on the stones when he died, it may be seen to
this day as fresh as if it had just come from the wounds.

Earl Rögnvald’s death was much lamented, because he was very popular in
the Islands and in many other parts. He had been helpful to many, was
liberal with his money, gentle, and a true friend, highly accomplished,
and a good scald. He left a daughter, Ingigerd, an only child, who was
married to Eirík Slagbrellir. Their children were Harald Ungi, Magnus
Mangi, Rögnvald, Ingibiorg, Elín, and Ragnhild.




                              CHAPTER CIX

                          OF HARALD AND SWEIN.


AFTER Earl Rögnvald’s death, Earl Harald took possession of the whole of
the Islands, and became their sole ruler. He was a mighty chief, and a
man of large stature and great strength. His wife was Afreka, and their
children were—Heinrek, Hákon, Helena, and Margarét. When Hákon was only
a few winters old, Swein, Asleif’s son, offered to foster him, and when
he was able to take his part with other men, Swein took him out on
marauding expeditions every summer, and honoured him in everything.
Swein used to reside at home in Gáreksey, in winter, keeping there
eighty men at his own expense. He had such a large drinking-hall that
there was none equal to it anywhere else in the Orkneys. In the spring
he was very busy sowing a large breadth of seed, and he usually did a
great part of the work himself. When this work was finished, he went
every spring on marauding expeditions. He plundered in the Sudreyar and
Ireland, and returned home after midsummer. This he called
spring-viking. Then he stayed at home till the fields were reaped and
the corn brought in. Then he went out again, and did not return until
one month of winter had passed. This he called autumn-viking.




                               CHAPTER CX

                         SWEIN GOES TO IRELAND.


ONCE it happened that Swein went out on a spring expedition, taking with
him Hákon, the son of Earl Harald. They had five rowing ships, all
large. They plundered in the Sudreyar. All the inhabitants were so
afraid of him that they hid all their movable property in the ground or
in heaps of loose stones. Swein went all the way south to Man, and
obtained very little booty. Then they went to Ireland and plundered
there, but when they were approaching Dýflin (Dublin) two merchant-ships
came from England, laden with English cloth and other merchandise; they
were going to Dýflin. Swein made for the vessels, and offered them
battle. There was little resistance by the English, and Swein’s party
took every penny in the vessels, leaving to the Englishmen only what
they stood in, and a small quantity of provisions. They sailed away in
the vessels, but Swein’s party went to the Sudreyar, and divided their
booty. They sailed from the west with great pomp. When they were lying
in harbours, they covered their ships with the English cloth, to make a
show; and when they sailed to the Orkneys, they sewed the cloth upon
their sails, and then it looked as if the sails were made entirely of
the fine stuffs. This they named the Skrud-viking.[448]

Swein went home to his estate in Gáreksey. He had taken a large quantity
of wine and English mead from the vessels. When he had been at home a
short time he invited Earl Harald, and prepared a splendid feast for
him. When Earl Harald was at the feast a great deal was said of Swein’s
magnificence. The Earl said: “I wish, Swein, you would now leave off
your marauding expeditions; it is good now to drive home a whole waggon.
You know that your plundering has fed you and your men a long time, but
to most men of violence it happens that they perish in their raiding, if
they do not leave it off in time.”

Swein looked to the Earl and said, smiling: “This is well said, my Lord;
you have spoken like a friend, and it is good to take sound advice from
you; but some complain that you are not an over just man yourself.”

The Earl replied: “I must be responsible for my own acts, but I spoke as
it occurred to me.”

Swein replied: “Your intention is no doubt good, my Lord; and it shall
be so, that I will discontinue my marauding expeditions, for I am
getting old, and my strength is wasting away in the wet work and the
fighting. I am now going to make an autumn expedition, and I wish it to
be not less glorious than the spring one. Then I shall leave off
war-going.”

The Earl replied: “It is difficult to know, comrade, which comes
first—death or lasting fame.”

Then their conversation ceased. When Earl Harald left the feast
honourable gifts were presented to him, and he and Swein parted very
good friends.




                              CHAPTER CXI

                SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON’S (LAST) EXPEDITION.


SHORTLY after this Swein prepared to go on a marauding expedition with
seven long-ships, all of them large. Hákon, the son of Earl Harald, went
with him. They went first to the Sudreyar, and found there little booty.
Then they went to Ireland, and plundered there in many places. They went
all the way south to Dýflin (Dublin), and took the inhabitants by
surprise, so that they did not know till they were in the town. They
took a great deal of plunder, and took captive the rulers of the city,
and their negotiations ended in the surrender of the town to Swein, and
they promised to pay as much money as he might levy on them. He was to
quarter his men on the town, and have the command of it, and the Dýflin
men confirmed this arrangement with oaths. Swein and his men went down
to their ships in the evening, but in the morning they were to come into
the town and receive hostages from the inhabitants.

Now it is to be told what was going on in the town during the night. The
rulers of the town had a meeting, and considered the difficulties in
which they were placed. They thought it a grievous hardship that they
should have to surrender their town to the Orkneymen, especially to him
whom they knew to be the most exacting man in the whole West; and they
came to the determination to play him false if they could. They resolved
to dig large pits inside of the city gates, and in many other places
between the houses, where it was intended that Swein’s men should come
in, and armed men were hidden in the houses close by. They placed such
coverings over the pits as were sure to fall in when the weight of the
men came upon them. Then they covered all over with straw, so that the
pits could not be seen, and waited till morning.




                              CHAPTER CXII

                      SWEIN, ASLEIF’S SON’S FALL.


NEXT morning Swein and his men arose and armed themselves, and went to
the town; and when they came near the gates the Dýflin men ranged
themselves on both sides from the gates along by the pits. Swein and his
men, not being on their guard, fell into them. Some of the townsmen ran
immediately to the gates, and others to the pits, and attacked Swein’s
men with weapons. It was difficult for them to defend themselves, and
Swein perished there in the pit, with all those who had entered the
town. It was said that Swein was the last man who died there, and that
he spake these words before his fall: “Know all men, whether I die
to-day or not, that I am the holy Earl Rögnvald’s henchman, and my
confidence is where he is with God.” Swein’s surviving followers went
then to their ships, and put out to sea; and nothing is said of their
voyage until they came to the Orkneys. Here is the end of Swein’s
history; and it has been said that he was the greatest man in the
Western lands, either in old times or at the present day, of those who
had not a higher title than he had. After his death his sons Olaf and
Andrés divided their patrimony. The next summer after his death they
raised the end walls of the large drinking-hall which he had in
Gáreksey. Andrés, the son of Swein, married Frída, the daughter of
Kolbein Hruga, and sister to Bishop Bjarni.




                             CHAPTER CXIII

                      OF EARL HARALD AND HIS SONS.


NOW Earl Harald ruled the Orkneys, and was a great chief.
Afterwards[449] he married Hvarflod,[450] the daughter of Earl
Malcolm,[451] of Mærhæfi (Moray). Their children were Thorfinn,[452]
David, Jón, Gunnhild, Herborga, and Langlíf.

When Bishop William the Second was dead, Bjarni, the son of Kolbein
Hruga, was made bishop after him. He was a very great man, and a dear
friend of Earl Harald. Bishop Bjarni had a large party of kinsmen in the
Islands. The sons of Eirík Slagbrellir were Harald Ungi, Magnus Mangi,
and Rögnvald. The brothers went east to Norway to see King Magnus,
Erling’s son, and he gave Harald the title of Earl, and one half of the
Islands, which had belonged to the holy Earl Rögnvald, his mother’s
father. Earl Harald Ungi went to the west, and with him Sigurd Murt, the
son of Ivar Galli. The mother of Ivar, who fell at Akr with Erling
Skakki, was the daughter of Hávard, Gunni’s son. Sigurd Murt was young,
handsome, and a great dandy. Magnus Mangi remained with the King, and
fell with him in Sogn.

Harald (Ungi) and his followers came first to Hjaltland. Then they went
over to Caithness, and then into Scotland, to William, King of
Scots.[453] Earl Harald requested King William to give him the half of
Caithness which Earl Rögnvald had held. The King granted him this; and
Earl Harald went then down to Caithness, and gathered troops. Then
Lífólf Skalli, his brother-in-law, came to him. He had many noble
kinsmen there. Lífólf had married Ragnhild, the sister of Earl Harald.
He was called Earl Harald Ungi (the younger); but Harald, Maddad’s son,
the elder. Lífólf had the command of the Earl’s troops. They sent men to
the Orkneys, to Earl Harald the elder, requesting him to give up one
half of the Islands, since the King had given them to Earl Harald Ungi.
When the Earl received this message, he refused absolutely to divide his
dominions on any condition. Lífólf Skalli was the messenger, and the
Earl upbraided him greatly before he left. After this, Earl Harald the
elder collected troops, and obtained a great many. Earl Harald Ungi’s
party were in Caithness, and had some gathering too. When they heard
that Harald the elder was collecting troops, they sent Lífólf a second
time across the Pentland Firth to gather information about the enemy’s
forces. He landed east in Rögnvaldsey, and ascended a hill, where he
found three of Harald’s watchmen. Two of them he killed, and one of them
he took with him for information. Then Lífólf saw the Earl’s fleet,
which consisted of many ships, most of them large. Then he went down
from the hill to his boat, and told his companions what he had
ascertained. He said Earl Harald had so large an army that it was quite
hopeless for them to fight with him. “I would advise,” said Lífólf,
“that we should go to-day to Thórsá, and there many troops will come to
us at once. If you wish to offer battle to Earl Harald now, it is most
imprudent, whatever the result may be.”

Then said Sigurd Murt: “Ill has the Earl’s brother-in-law fared across
the Pentland Firth if he has left his heart behind him;” adding,
further, that their prospects were not bright if all should lose heart
when they saw Earl Harald’s army.

Lífólf replied: “It is difficult to see, Sigurd, where each one carries
his heart when courage is required; and I believe you men of mark will
think it a serious matter to remain behind when I run from Harald Ungi.”

They did not go to Thórsá; but shortly after they saw Earl Harald’s
fleet coming from Rögnvaldsey, and then they prepared for battle. Earl
Harald went on shore, and placed his men in battle array. They far
exceeded the others in number. Sigurd Murt and Lífólf arranged the
troops of Earl Ungi. The former was dressed in a scarlet tunic, and
tucked the skirt under his belt. Some said that the same should be done
behind, but he told them not to do it, “for,” said he, “I shall not go
backwards to-day.” Lífólf and Sigurd led one wing each, and when they
had arrayed their men the battle began with great fury. Among the troops
of Earl Harald the elder there were many hardy, fierce, and well-armed
men, the Bishop’s kinsmen, and many others of the Earl’s champions. When
the battle had lasted for a while, Sigurd Murt fell, having borne
himself well and bravely. Lífólf behaved the most valiantly of them all.
The Caithnessmen say he broke three times through the ranks of Earl
Harald’s men, yet he fell in this fight, after having earned great fame.
When both were dead—Lífólf and Sigurd Murt—Earl Ungi’s men fled. Earl
Harald Ungi fell at some turf-pits,[454] and that very night a great
light was seen where his blood fell on the ground. People said he was
truly a saint, and there is now a church where he fell. He is buried in
Ness (Caithness). Innumerable miracles are by God granted through his
merits, which testify that he wished to go to Orkney to his kinsmen Earl
Magnus and Earl Rögnvald. After the battle Earl Harald subdued the whole
of Caithness, and went back triumphant to the Orkneys.




                              CHAPTER CXIV

                           OF THE ORKNEYMEN.


WILLIAM, King of Scots, heard that Earl Harald (Ungi) had been killed,
and also that Earl Harald, Maddad’s son, had subdued the whole of
Caithness without asking his leave. He became enraged at this, and sent
men to the Sudreyar to Rögnvald, Gudröd’s son, the King of the Sudreyar.
Gudröd’s mother was Ingibiorg, daughter of Earl Hákon, Paul’s son. King
Rögnvald was the greatest warrior then in the western lands. Three
winters he had been out in war-ships without coming under a sooty
rafter. When this message came to Rögnvald, he collected an army from
all the kingdom of the Sudreyar and from Satiri (Kintyre). He had also a
large army from Ireland. Then he went north to Caithness, took
possession of the whole of the territory, and remained there some time.
Earl Harald kept in the Orkneys, and took no heed of the King’s
movements. Towards winter King Rögnvald prepared to go home to his
dominions in the Sudreyar. He left three stewards (sýslumenn) over
Caithness. One was Máni, Olaf’s son; the second Rafn, the lawman; and
the third, Hlífólf Alli. Some time after, King Rögnvald returned to the
Sudreyar. Earl Harald sent a man over to Ness (Caithness), saying that
he would consider his journey a lucky one if he could kill any of the
stewards or all of them. This man was brought across the Pentland Firth,
and he went on till he came to Lawman Rafn. Rafn asked him where he was
going, and he had little to say in reply. Rafn said: “I can see in you
that Earl Harald has sent you over here for some evil purpose, but I
have not the heart to slay you, because you are my kinsman.” Thus they
parted, and he went away to Hlífólf, and their intercourse ended in
Hlífólf’s murder. Then he fled to the Orkneys to Earl Harald, and told
him what he had done.




                              CHAPTER CXV

                      HARALD TORTURES THE BISHOP.


NOW Earl Harald prepared to leave the Orkneys, and when he was quite
ready he went first to Thórsá, and landed from his ships there. The
Bishop was in the borg at Skárabólstad (Scrabster). When the
Caithnessmen saw Earl Harald’s army, they perceived it was so numerous
that they had no chance to withstand them. They were told also that the
Earl was in such an evil temper that there was no knowing what he might
do. Then the Bishop took speech, and said: “If our dealings turn out
well, he will give you peace.”[455] They did as the Bishop told them.
The Earl’s men rushed from the ships up to the borg. The Bishop went to
meet the Earl, and saluted him with bland words, but their dealing
turned out in this way, that Earl Harald had the Bishop seized, his
tongue cut out, and then he caused a knife to be thrust into his eyes,
and blinded him. Bishop Jón prayed to the holy virgin Tröllhæna during
his torture, and then he went on a certain bank, when they let him go.
There was a woman on the bank, and the Bishop asked her to help him. She
saw that blood was flowing from his face, and said: “Be silent, my lord,
and I shall willingly help you.” The Bishop was brought to the
resting-place of the holy Tröllhæna,[456] and there he recovered both
his speech and sight.

Earl Harald went up to the borg, and it was immediately surrendered to
him.[457] He proceeded at once to punish the inhabitants severely, and
imposed heavy fines on those whom he considered most guilty of treachery
to him; and he made all the Caithnessmen acknowledge him by oath as
their lord, whether they liked it or not. Then he took possession of all
the property belonging to the stewards, who had fled to the King of
Scots. Then Earl Harald resided in Caithness with many men.




                              CHAPTER CXVI

                            OF THE STEWARDS.


NOW it is to be told of the stewards (sýslumenn) that they went six
together to Scotland, and saw the King during Advent. They were able to
give particular intelligence of everything that had happened in
Caithness during Earl Harald’s stay there. The King was highly enraged
at hearing the news, but he said he would pay back double to those who
had lost their own. The first day they stayed with the King twenty-five
ells of cloth and an English mark in ready money was given to each of
them. They spent the Yule-tide with the King, and were well treated.

After Yule-tide the King sent word to all the chiefs in his kingdom, and
collected a large army throughout the country, and with all these troops
he went down to Caithness against Earl Harald. With this great army he
pursued his journey till he came to Eysteinsdal,[458] where Caithness
and Sutherland meet. The camp of the King of Scots stretched far along
the valleys.

Earl Harald was in Caithness when he heard the news, and he drew troops
together immediately. It is said he obtained six thousand men, and yet
he had no chance to withstand the King of Scots. Then he sent men to him
to sue for peace. When this request was brought before the King, he said
it was no use asking for peace unless he had every fourth penny that was
to be found in all the land of Caithness.

When the Earl received this message, he called together the inhabitants
and chiefs, and consulted with them. As, however, they had no means of
resisting, it was agreed that the Caithnessmen should pay one-fourth of
all their property to the King of Scots, except those men who had gone
to see the King in winter. Earl Harald went out to the Orkneys, and was
to have Caithness as he had it before it was given to Earl Harald Ungi
by the King of Scots. Thorfinn, the son of Earl Harald, who was a
hostage with the King of Scots, was blinded during these hostilities.

When peace had been made, the King returned to Scotland. Earl Harald was
now the sole ruler of the Orkneys. In the later part of the days of Earl
Harald, his brother-in-law, Olaf, and Jón, Hallkell’s son, raised a
party in the Orkneys, and went east to Norway against King Sverrir. They
made Sigurd, the son of King Magnus, Erling’s son, their King. Many men
of noble birth in the Orkneys joined this party, and it was very strong.
They were for a while called Eyjarskeggiar (Islanders) or Gullbeinir
(goldenlegs). They fought with King Sverrir in Flóruvogar, and were
beaten.[459] Both Jón and Olaf were killed, as also their King, and most
of their men. After this King Sverrir became a great enemy of Earl
Harald, laying it to his charge that he was the cause of the party being
raised. At last Earl Harald went from the west, and Bishop Bjarni went
along with him. The Earl left his case without reservation to the
decision of King Sverrir. Then King Sverrir took all Hjaltland from Earl
Harald, with its taxes (scat) and dues, as a fine; and the Earls of
Orkney have never had it since.[460]

Earl Harald was five winters old when he was made Earl, and for twenty
winters he and Earl Rögnvald were together Earls of Orkney. After Earl
Rögnvald’s death, he was forty-eight winters Earl of Orkney, and he died
in the second year of the reign of King Ingi, Bard’s son.[461] Earl
Harald’s sons, Jón and David, succeeded him; and Heinrek, his son, had
Ross in Scotland.

The following have been the most powerful of the Earls of Orkney,
according to the relation of those who have made histories of
them:—Sigurd, Eystein’s son; Earl Thorfinn, Sigurd’s son; and Earl
Harald, Maddad’s son.

The brothers Jón and David ruled the land after their father, until
David died from disease, the same year as Hákon Galinn died in
Norway.[462] After that Jón took the title of Earl of all the Orkneys.




                             CHAPTER CXVII

                      THE BURNING OF BISHOP ADAM.


WHEN Bishop Jón, he who was maimed by the order of Earl Harald, died in
Caithness, a man who was called Adam was made Bishop in his stead. None
knew his family, because when a child he was found at the door of a
certain church. The Caithnessmen found him rather exacting in his
office, and blamed a certain monk who was with him chiefly for that. It
was an ancient custom that the Bishop should receive a spann[463] of
butter of every twenty cows. Every Bondi in Caithness had to pay this—he
more who had more cows, and he who had fewer less, and so in proportion.
Bishop Adam wished to increase the impost, and demanded a spann of every
fifteen cows; and when that was obtained, he demanded it of twelve; and
when this too was conceded, he demanded it of ten. But this was thought
by all men most unreasonable.

Then the Caithnessmen went to see Earl Jón, who was then in Caithness,
and they complained of this before the Earl. He said he would have
nothing to do with it, adding that the case was not a difficult one.
There were two alternatives: this was not to be endured, yet he would
not say what the other might be.

Bishop Adam was at Há Kirkia,[464] in Thorsdal, and Earl Jón was a short
distance off. The Caithnessmen held a meeting on a hill above the
village where the Bishop was. Lawman Rafn was with the Bishop, and
begged him to spare the inhabitants, saying that otherwise he feared the
consequences. The Bishop asked him to be of good cheer, saying that the
Bœndr (farmers) would become quiet of their own accord. Then a man was
sent to Earl Jón, requesting him to make peace between them and the
Bishop. But the Earl would not meddle with the matter at all. Then the
Bœndr ran down from the hill in great excitement, and when Lawman Rafn
saw it he warned the Bishop to take care of himself. The Bishop and his
friends were drinking in a loft there, and when the Bœndr arrived the
monk went to the door, and he was immediately hewn across the face, and
fell back into the room dead. When the Bishop heard it, he said: “This
did not happen sooner than might have been expected, for his
interference in our transactions has generally been unfortunate.” Then
Rafn asked the Bishop to tell the Bœndr that he was willing to come to
an agreement with them; and when they heard it, all the wiser men among
them were very glad. Then the Bishop went out to make an arrangement
with them; but when he was seen by the more wicked ones, who were most
furious, they seized the Bishop, brought him into a small house, and set
fire to it, and the house burnt so quickly that those who wished to save
the Bishop could not do anything. Bishop Adam perished there.[465] His
body was not much burnt when it was found. Then the body was buried
suitably and honourably; but those who had been the best friends of the
Bishop sent men to the King of Scots. Alexander, son of the holy King
William, was then King of Scotland. When he heard the tidings, he became
so enraged that the punishments inflicted by him for the burning of the
Bishop, by mutilation and death, confiscation and outlawry from the
land, are still in fresh memory.

And now we cannot relate more distinctly than we have here done the
events concerning the Earls of Orkney.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               APPENDIX.

                                -------

                      SAGA OF OLAF, TRYGGVI’S SON.

                       (_From the Flateyjarbók._)


            THE DOMINIONS OF KING HARALD AND EARL RÖGNVALD.


179. Earl Rögnvald assisted Harald Harfagri (fair-haired) to conquer the
country (Norway), and he gave him the revenues of both Mœri and
Raumsdal. Rögnvald had married Ragnhild, the daughter of Hrólf Nefia
(nose). They had a son named Hrólf, who conquered Normandy. Hrólf was so
big that no horse could carry him, and he was therefore called
Gönguhrólf (Hrólf the walker). From him the Earls of Rúda (Rouen) and
the Kings of England are descended. They had two other sons, Ivar and
Earl Thórir Thegiandi (the silent). Rögnvald had also sons by his
concubines. They were Hallad, Hrollaug, and Einar, who was the youngest.
One summer Harald Harfagri went to the west across the sea to punish the
Vikings, as he was weary of their devastations. They plundered in Norway
during the summer, and spent the winters in Hjaltland or the Orkneys.
Harald subdued Hjaltland, the Orkneys, and the Sudreyar (Hebrides). He
went west as far as the Isle of Man, and destroyed all the dwellings in
Man. He fought many battles there, and extended his dominion so far to
the west that none of the Kings of Norway since his time has had wider
dominions. In one of these battles, Ivar, the son of Earl Rögnvald,
fell. So when King Harald sailed from the west he gave Hjaltland and the
Orkneys to Earl Rögnvald as a compensation for [the loss of] his son;
but Earl Rögnvald gave the Islands to his brother Sigurd, who was King
Harald’s forecastleman; and the King gave him the title of Earl before
he left the west. Sigurd remained out in the west.


                     EARL MELBRIGD SLAIN BY SIGURD.


180. Earl Sigurd became a great chief. He formed an alliance with
Thorstein the Red, son of Olaf the White, and Aud Djúpaudga (the very
wealthy), and together they conquered all Caithness and much more of
Scotland—Mærhæfui (Moray) and Ross. He built a borg on the southern
border of Mærhæfui. Melbrigd Tönn (tooth), an Earl of the Scots, and
Earl Sigurd, made an arrangement to meet in a certain place, with forty
men each, in order to come to an agreement concerning their differences.
When the appointed day arrived Earl Sigurd was suspicious of treachery
on the part of the Scots. He therefore caused eighty men to be mounted
on forty horses. When Earl Melbrigd saw this, he said to his men:—“Now
we have been treacherously dealt with by Earl Sigurd, for I see two
men’s legs on one side of each horse, and the men, I believe, are thus
twice as many as the beasts. But let us be brave, and kill each his man
before we die.” Then they made themselves ready. When Sigurd saw it, he
also decided on his plan, and said to his men:—“Now, let one-half of our
number dismount and attack them from behind, when the troops meet, while
we shall ride at them with all our speed to break their battle array.”
There was hard fighting immediately, and it was not long till Earl
Melbrigd fell, and all his men with him. Earl Sigurd and his men
fastened the heads [of the slain] to their saddle-straps, in bravado,
and so they rode home triumphing in their victory. As they were
proceeding, Earl Sigurd, intending to kick at his horse with his foot,
struck the calf of his leg against a tooth protruding from Earl
Melbrigd’s head, which scratched him slightly; but it soon became
swollen and painful, and he died of it. Sigurd the powerful was buried
in a mound at Ekkialsbakki.[466]

Sigurd’s son was named Guthorm. He reigned one winter, and died
childless.

When Earl Rögnvald heard of the death of Earl Sigurd and his son, he
sent his son Hallad out to the west, and King Harald gave him the title
of Earl. Hallad came out to the west, and took up his residence in
Hrossey,[467] but Vikings went prowling about the islands and outlying
headlands, slaying men and seizing booty. The Bœndr complained of their
losses to Earl Hallad, but they thought he did not get them much redress
for their wrongs. Then Hallad grew tired of the dignity, and resigned
the earldom, took up his odal rights, and returned to Norway, and his
journey was regarded as a very ignominious one.


                      EINAR COMES TO THE ISLANDS.


181. Two Danish Vikings took up their quarters in the Islands; one of
them was called Thórir Tréskegg (wooden beard), the other Kálf Skurfa
(scurf). When Earl Rögnvald heard this he became very angry, and called
his sons Thórir and Hrollaug. Hrólf was at that time on a war
expedition. Rögnvald asked which of them would go to the Islands. Thórir
said he would follow his advice.

The Earl replied: “I foresee that your power will be greatest here; and
your ways do not lead from home.”

Hrollaug said: “Father, would you like me to go?”

The Earl replied: “It will never be your fortune to become an Earl. Your
way lies towards Iceland. There you will increase your family, and it
will be a noble one.”

Then Einar, his youngest son, came forward and said: “Would you like me
to go to the Islands? One thing I will promise, which will be very
acceptable to you—viz. that I shall never more come into your presence;
little honour do I enjoy at home, and it is hardly likely that my
success will be less elsewhere than it is here.”

The Earl said: “You are not likely to become a chief, on account of your
birth, for all your kin on the mother’s side are thrall-born; but it is
true that the sooner you go and the longer you stay the more agreeable
it will be to me.” Earl Rögnvald gave him a fully-equipped vessel, with
twenty benches, and King Harald gave him the title of Earl.


                           THE VIKINGS SLAIN.


182. Einar sailed to Hjaltland, and there many men gathered round him.
Then he went to the Orkneys to meet Kálf Skurfa and Thórir Tréskegg.
There was a great battle, and both the Vikings were killed. This was
said about it:

                     Tré-skegg gave he to the Trows:
                     Skurfa fell before Torf-Einar.

Then Einar took possession of the lands, and soon became a great chief.
He was the man who first cut turf (peat) from the ground for fuel at
Torfnes in Scotland, for fuel was scarce in the Islands. Einar was a
tall man, ugly, and with one eye, yet he was very keen-sighted.


             BATTLE BETWEEN EARL EINAR AND PRINCE HALFDAN.


183. When the sons of Harald Harfagri grew up they became men of great
violence and turbulence, as has been told before. The sons of Snæfríd,
Hálfdán Hálegg (high legs) and Gudröd Liomi (splendour) killed Rögnvald,
Earl of Mœri. King Harald became very angry at this, and Hálfdán had to
flee over seas to the west, but Gudröd became reconciled to his father.
When Hálfdán Hálegg came to the Orkneys, Earl Einar fled from the
Islands to Scotland, and Hálfdán became King over the Islands. Earl
Einar came back during the same year, and when they met there was a
great battle, in which Einar had the victory, and Hálfdán fled away.
Einar sang this song:

                 Why are not the spear-shafts flying,
                 From the hands of Hrólf and Hrollaug,
                 Thickly ’gainst the press of warriors?
                 Now, my father! I avenge thee.
                 While we here are closed in battle,
                 Sits Earl Thórir all the evening,
                 Silent o’er his cheerless drink.

Next morning they found Hálfdán Hálegg on Rinar’s Hill. The Earl made a
blood eagle be cut on his back with the sword, and had his ribs severed
from the back-bone, and his lungs pulled out. Thus he gave him to Odinn
as an offering for victory, and sang this song:

                 Oft it is that bearded men
                 Are guilty deemed for taking sheep;
                 But my offence is that I slew
                 The young son of the Islands’ king.
                 Men may say that danger waits me
                 From the great king’s speedy vengeance;
                 But his wrath shall never daunt me,
                 In whose shield I’ve made a dint.

Then he had a cairn raised over him, and sang this song:

                  Vengeance for my father’s death
                  I have ta’en for my fourth share.
                  In him the people’s champion fell;
                  But it was the Norns’ decree.
                  Heap we now a cairn o’er High-leg,
                  Thus the hard skatt we shall pay him
                  Which as victors we are due him.
                  Let the wise to me now listen.

When this was heard in Norway his brothers became greatly enraged, and
threatened an expedition to the Islands to avenge him, but Harald
delayed their journey. When Earl Einar heard of their threats, he sang:

                 Men of no ignoble birth
                 Are they who, from my native land,
                 Seek my life for vengeance’ sake;
                 But the truth is, that they know not,
                 Till their swords have surely slain me,
                 Whom the eagles’ claws shall rend.

Some time afterwards King Harald set out for the western seas, and came
to the Islands. Einar fled from the Islands to Caithness. Then men went
between them, and they made peace. King Harald imposed a fine upon the
Islands, adjudging them to pay sixty marks of gold. Earl Einar offered
[to the Bœndr] to pay the money himself, on condition that he should
become proprietor of all their freeholds. The Bœndr accepted this,
because the wealthy men thought they might redeem their freeholds, and
the poorer men had no money. Einar paid the whole sum, and for a long
time afterwards the Earls held all the odal lands, until Earl Sigurd
gave back their odal possessions to the Orkneymen. King Harald went back
to Norway, but Earl Einar ruled over the Orkneys a long time, and died
on a sick-bed. He had three sons: one was named Arnkell, the second
Erlend, and the third Thorfinn Hausakliuf (skull-splitter).

When Harald Harfagri died, Eirík Blódöx (bloody-axe) was King for two
winters. Then Hakon, Athelstan’s foster son, came to the land, and Eirík
fled. Arnkell and Erlend, the sons of Torf Einar, fell with Eirík Blódöx
in England. Gunnhild and her sons then went to the Orkneys, and took
possession of them, and stayed there for a time. From thence they went
to Denmark, but before they went away they married Ragnhild, the
daughter of Gunnhild and Eirík, to Arnfinn, the son of Earl Thorfinn
[Hausakliuf], and Earl Thorfinn took up his residence in the Islands: he
was a great and warlike chief. He died on a sick-bed, and was buried in
a mound on Hauga Heath,[468] in Rögnvaldsey, and was considered to have
been a great man.


                         THE MURDER OF HAVARD.


184. Thorfinn had five sons. One was named Hávard Arsæli (blessed with
good seasons), the second Hlödver, the third Liót, the fourth Skúli, and
the fifth Arnfinn. Ragnhild, the daughter of Eirík, killed her husband
Arnfinn at Myrkhol (Murkle), in Caithness, and then she married Hávard
Arsæli, his brother. He became Earl, and was a good chief, and blessed
with good seasons. There was a man named Einar Klíning (buttered bread),
the son of Hávard’s sister. He was a great chief, and had many men, and
went usually on war expeditions during the summer. He accepted an
invitation from Hávard, and at that feast he and Ragnhild talked much
together. She said that it was more suitable that such a man as he
should be chief and Earl than Hávard his kinsman, adding that the woman
was well married who had him for a husband. Einar told her not to speak
of such things, saying that Hávard was the noblest man in the Islands,
and that she was well matched. Ragnhild replied: “Hávard and I shall not
be long together after this. But it is true that men will be found in
the Islands who will not stick at trifles if you grudge me the dignity.”
By her persuasion Einar was moved to covetousness and treachery against
his kinsman. They agreed that he should kill the Earl, and that she
should marry him. Some time after Einar prepared to take out his men,
but a certain spaeman who was with him said: “Do not engage in this
business to-day; wait till to-morrow, or else family murders will be
frequent in your family.” Einar pretended not to hear this. At this time
Hávard was at Steinsness,[469] in Hrossey. There they met, and there was
hard fighting, and it was not long till the Earl fell. The place is now
called Hávard’s teigar.[470] When this became known, Einar was
considered a great nithing[471] for the deed. Ragnhild would have
nothing to do with him, saying it was a mere lie that she had given him
any promises. Then she sent for Einar Hardkiöpt (hard mouth), who was
the son of another sister of Hávard. And when they met, she said it was
a great shame to Hávard’s kinsmen that they did not avenge him, adding
that she would do anything that the Earl might be avenged. “It is
evident,” she said, “that he who avenges the Earl will be most esteemed
by good people, and will most deserve his dominions.” Einar replied: “It
is said that you sometimes speak differently from what you think. But he
who does this deed will expect in return that you will help him to the
dominions, as well as to other things which he will consider not less
important.” This was the end of their talk. After this Einar Hardkiöpt
went to Einar Klíning and killed him. But Ragnhild sent for their
brother Liót, and married him. Liót became Earl, and was a great chief.
Now Einar Hardkiöpt had killed his kinsman, and was not any nearer the
earldom than before. He was highly dissatisfied, and wished to collect
men together and subdue the Islands by force. He had great difficulty in
getting men, for the Orkneymen wished to serve the sons of Thorfinn
Hausakliuf. Some time afterwards the Earl had Einar Hardkiöpt slain.


                     BATTLE BETWEEN LIOT AND SKULI.


185. Skúli, the brother of Liót, went to Scotland, and had an Earl’s
title given him by the King of Scots. Then he went down to Caithness,
and collected forces together; from thence he went to the Islands, and
fought with his brother for the dominion of them. Liót collected a
numerous army, and went against Skúli. When they met, Skúli would
nothing but fight. There was a severely contested battle. Liót gained
the victory, and Skúli fled over to Ness (Caithness). Liót pursued him,
stayed there for a while, and got many men together. Then Skúli came
down from Scotland with a large army, and met Liót at Dalir (Dale), in
Caithness, and a great battle ensued. Skúli had a large army given him
by the King of Scots and Earl Magbiód.[472] In the beginning of the
battle the Scots fought hotly. Earl Liót told his men to act on the
defensive, and to stand firm; and when the Scots could not make any
impression on them, Liót incited his men, and fought very fiercely
himself. When this had been going on for some time, the array of the
Scots was broken, and then they fled; but Skúli continued the battle,
and was ultimately killed. Liót took possession of Caithness, and he and
the Scots were at war, because they were vexed at their defeat. When
Earl Liót was in Caithness, Earl Magbiód came down from Scotland with a
large army, and they met at Skida-mire (Skitten), in Caithness. Although
Earl Liót’s forces were not equal to those of the Scots, he fought so
bravely that the Scots gave way, and the battle had not continued long
when those of the Scots who were left alive fled, and many of them were
wounded. Liót returned from the pursuit victorious, but with many men
wounded, and he himself had received wounds, of which he died.


                                BATTLE.


186. Hlödver was Earl after Liót, and became a great chief. He married
Audna, the daughter of Kiarval, the King of the Ivar.[473] Their son was
Sigurd the stout. Hlödver died on a sick-bed, and was buried at Hofn
(Huna), in Caithness. His son Sigurd succeeded him, and became a great
chief, with extensive possessions. He kept Caithness by main force from
the Scots, and went every summer on war expeditions to the Sudreyar
(Hebrides), Scotland, and Ireland. One summer Finnleik, an Earl of the
Scots, challenged Sigurd to meet him at Skida-mire on a certain day; but
Sigurd went to consult his mother, who was a wise woman. The Earl told
her that the difference in numbers would not be less than seven to one.
She replied: “I should have reared thee up long in my wool-bag if I had
known that thou wouldst wish to live for ever. It is fate that rules
life, and not the place where a man may go. It is better to die with
honour than live with shame. Take thou here this banner which I have
made with all my skill, and I ween that it will bring victory to him
before whom it is borne, but death to its bearer.” The banner was
wrought with cunningly executed handiwork and elaborate art. It was made
in the shape of a raven, and when floating in the wind it resembled the
raven flying. Earl Sigurd was very wroth at his mother’s words. He
restored their odal rights to the Orkneymen to induce them to assist
him, and went to meet Earl Finnleik at Skida-mire, where they both
placed their men in battle array. When the forces met, Earl Sigurd’s
standard-bearer was killed by an arrow. The Earl ordered another to bear
the banner, and when they had fought for a while he also fell. Three
standard-bearers were killed, but the Earl gained the victory, and the
Orkneymen regained their freeholds.


           MEETING BETWEEN OLAF (TRYGGVI’S SON) AND THE EARL.


187. Olaf, Tryggvi’s son, sailed west to the Orkneys, as has been
mentioned before. But as the Pentland Firth was not to be passed at the
time, he moored his ships in Asmundarvag (Osmondwall) opposite
Rögnvaldsey. Earl Sigurd, Hlödver’s son, was there before him with three
ships, for he was going on a war expedition. When King Olaf became aware
that the Earl was there, he called him into his presence. But when the
Earl came to the King’s ship, the King spoke as follows:—

“You know, Earl Sigurd, that Harald Harfagri came here to the west with
an army when he had obtained possession of all Norway. King Harald
conquered the Orkneys and Hjaltland, and many other lands here in the
west. The King gave the Islands to Rögnvald the Powerful as a
compensation for his son, but Rögnvald gave them to his brother Sigurd,
and he became the Earl of King Harald. King Harald went a second time
against Earl Einar with a large army; but well-disposed men mediated
between them, and they agreed to the following terms:—The King claimed
all the Orkneys and Hjaltland as his own; and the result of their
negotiations was that the Earl paid the King sixty marks of gold for the
murder of his son, Halfdan Hálegg, and Earl Einar then held the lands
from King Harald. Shortly afterwards, King Eirík, Harald’s son, came
from Norway. Then also the Earls, the sons of Torfeinar, were his
vassals. This appears from the fact that they gave him many men for his
war expeditions. When King Eirík came to the Islands a second time, he
took away with him the two Earls, Arnkell and Erlend, and appointed
their brother Thorfinn to rule over the land. They were both killed in
England with King Eirík. Then the sons of Eirík came from England and
ruled over the Islands, and when they departed they appointed Arnfinn,
their brother-in-law, ruler of the Islands. Havard first succeeded his
brother (Arnfinn), then Liót, and lastly your father, Hlödver. Now you,
Sigurd, are Earl over these lands which I claim as my possessions, with
all other lands possessed by Harald Harfagri and his kinsmen, and
descending from them to me by inheritance from generation to generation.
You know that most of the sons of Eirík and Gunnhild have now been
killed. And although their sister Ragnhild is still alive, it seems to
me that she has been guilty of such wickedness in the Orkneys that she
ought not to have dignity or power anywhere; indeed, my view is that she
has completely forfeited both property and life if it be true that she
has done all the shameful deeds that are reported of her, and generally
believed. Now, since it has so happened, Earl Sigurd, that you have come
into my power, you have to choose between two very unequal alternatives.
One is, that you embrace the true faith, become my man, and be baptized
with all your subjects. In that case you may have certain hope of honour
from me. You shall hold in full liberty as my subject, and with the
dignity of an Earl, all the dominions which you have had before. And
besides, you will gain what is much more important—namely, to reign in
eternal joy in the kingdom of Heaven with the Almighty God. Of this you
may be sure if you keep his commandments. The other alternative is a
very hard one, and quite unlike the former—viz. that you shall be slain
on the spot, and after your death I will send fire and sword throughout
the Orkneys, burning homesteads and men, unless this people is willing
to accept immunity by believing in the true God. And if you and your
subjects choose the latter alternative, you and they, who put your trust
in idols, shall speedily die, and shall thereafter be tormented in
hell-fire, with wicked devils, without end.”

When Earl Sigurd had listened to King Olaf’s long and eloquent harangue,
he hardened his mind against him, and said: “I will tell you, King Olaf,
that I have absolutely resolved that I will not, and I dare not,
renounce the faith which my kinsmen and forefathers had before me,
because I do not know better counsels than they, and I do not know that
the faith which you preach is better than that which we have had and
have held all our lives.”

When the King saw that the Earl persisted obstinately in his error, he
caught hold of his young son, who was with him, and who had been brought
up in the Islands. The King carried this son of the Earl to the forepart
of the ship. There he drew his sword, and made ready to hew the boy
down, saying at the same time: “Now I will show you, Earl Sigurd, that I
shall spare no man who will not serve Almighty God, or listen to my
preaching of the blessed message. Therefore I shall kill your son before
your eyes this instant, with the sword now in my hand, unless you and
your men will serve my God. For I shall not leave these Islands until I
have completely fulfilled his blessed commission, and you have been
baptized along with this son of yours whom I now hold.”

And because the Earl was situated as he was, he chose the better
alternative of doing as the King desired, and so he embraced the true
faith. Then the Earl was baptized, and so were all the people of the
Orkneys. Then Earl Sigurd became the Earl of King Olaf according to this
world’s dignity, and held from him lands and dominions, and gave him as
a hostage his son who has already been mentioned. His name was Hvelp or
Hundi (whelp or hound). King Olaf had him baptized by the name of
Hlödver, and took him with him to Norway. Earl Sigurd confirmed all
their agreement with oaths. After this King Olaf sailed from the
Orkneys, leaving priests to instruct the people in the holy faith. King
Olaf and Earl Sigurd parted friends. Hlödver lived but a short time, and
after his death Earl Sigurd paid no homage to King Olaf. Then he married
the daughter of Melkolf, the King of Scots, and their son was Thorfinn.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 INDEX.


 Aberbrothock, liv.

 Aberdeen (Apardion), 155.

 Acre (Akursborg), 147.

 Adalbert, Archbishop, lxxii.
   " Bishop, lxxii.

 Adalbrekt, Priest, 70.

 Adam, Bishop of Caithness, xliv, lxxxi, lxxxiii.

 Adam of Bremen, lxxii.

 Adamnan, x, xiii.

 Adriatic, 150.

 Aedan, King, xi.

 Ægean Sea, 149.

 Ægisness, 149.

 Ægos, 149.

 Afreka, xlii, 188.

 Agdir, in Norway, 57, 58, 75, 82, 97, 140.

 Akursborg (Acre), 147.

 Alaborg (Aalborg in Jutland), 43.

 Alan, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxiv, lxxxvi.

 Alasund (Yell Sound, Shetland), 86.

 Albania, 150.

 Aldeigiuborg (Ladoga), 24.

 Alexander I., King of Scots, 108.
   " II., King of Scots, 201.
   " Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvii.

 Alvidra, 78.

 Amundi, 5, 6.
   " son of Knefi, 176.

 Anakol, 154, 156, 160, 162.

 Andrew, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxv.

 Andreas, Swein’s son, 155, 191.

 Anglesea Sound, 54, 58.

 Angus, Earls of, xlvi.

 Anselm, Archbishop, lxxiii.

 Apardion (Aberdeen), 155.

 Archibald, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxiii.

 Apulia (Pull, Puglia), 150.

 Ard, Alexander de, lix.
   " Matilda de, lvii.
   " Wayland de, lvii.

 Ari Frodi, xiii, xx.

 Argyle, xi.

 Armagh, xxi.

 Armod, Skald, 130, 131, 134, 146.

 Arnfinn, 211.

 Arni, Rafn’s son, 157.
   " Spítulegg, 133, 134.

 Arnkell, Einar’s son, Earl, xxv, 2, 207, 211.
   " of Scapa, 92.

 Arnor Jarlaskald, 17, 19, 20, 22, 28, 30, 33-35, 44, 107.

 Arran, xlviii.

 Asbiörn, son of Grim of Swiney, 74, 91, 92.
   " Skerablesi, xxii.

 Asgrim’s ærgin, 187.

 Ask, 84, 85.

 Askary, in Caithness, 187.

 Aslak, Erlend’s son, 98, 105, 128, 134, 139, 144.
   " Kolbein Hruga’s son, 126.

 Asleif, 91.

 Asmund the White, xxix.

 Asmundarvag (Osmondwall), xxvii, 3, 8, 210.

 Asolf, 183, 184.

 Assary; _see_ Askary.

 Assynt, Sutherlandshire, 167.

 Athole (Atjöklar), 86, 105, 107, 113, 115.

 Atjoklsbakki, 107.

 Aud the Wealthy, xxii, 203.

 Audfinn, Bishop of Bergen, li, liii, lxxvii.

 Audna, Kiarval’s daughter, xxvi, xxix, 209.

 Audun Raudi, 144, 146.

 Aulver Illteit, xlvi.

 Aurridafiord (Bay of Frith, Orkney), 92, 95.

 Austragdir, 75.


 Baefiord, xxxi, 21.

 Baldwin, Abbot, 124.

 Balliol, Edward, lvii.

 Bardsvík, 166, 175.

 Barthhead, 175.

 Beaufort Castle, 21.

 Beauly Firth, 21.

 Beaumont, Henry de, lvii.

 Bellaland, 192.

 Benedict, 159, 160.

 Beorhtric, King, xxi.

 Berg, Borgar, 47, 74, 110.

 Bergen (Biörgvin), 57, 76, 77, 85, 98, 127, 131.

 Bergliót, 47.

 Beruvik (Berriedale in Caithness), xxx, 18, 165.
   " (Berwick-on-Tweed), 161, 162.

 Bharruick, Caistal a, 18.

 Biadmonia, 57, 58.

 Birgishérad (Birsay), 43, 44, 68, 178.

 Birsay, Brough of, church at, xcviii.

 Bishops of Caithness, list of, lxxix.
   " of Orkney, " lxxi.

 Bjarni, Grímkell’s son, 131.
   " Skald, Bishop of Orkney, xxxix, lxxv, lxxx, 126, 188, 191, 193,
      199.

 Björn Brynjúlfson, cxi.

 Blan, Thorstein’s son, 74, 92.

 Blingery, in Caithness, 187.

 Bly-holmar, 162.

 Bolgaraland, 150.

 Borgar, 47, 74, 110.

 Borgarfiord, 60, 115.

 Botolf Begla, 167, 168.

 Boyamund de Vitia, lxxxiv.

 Bracadale, Loch, 27.

 Breidafiord (Moray Firth), 20, 21, 107, 125, 161.

 Brekasettr, 60.

 Brekkur, 74, 105.

 Bressay (Brusey), xv.
   " sculptured stone at, xv, xvi, xvii.
   " Sound, xlvii.

 Bretland (Wales), 7, 54, 56, 117.

 Brian Borumha, King, xxviii, 4, 57.

 Brian’s battle (Clontarf), xxviii, 4.

 Britons, 30, 113.

 Brogar, standing stones of, cvi.

 Bruce, Isabel, li.
   " Robert, li, lii, liv.

 Bruide Mac Bile, King, xi.
   " Mac Meilcon, x.

 Brúsi, Thorfinn’s son, Earl, xxix, 3, 4, 7, 10, 12, 15, 16, 23, 26, 34.

 Brynjúlf, Paul’s son, 46.
   " Sigurd’s son, 46, 73, 110.
   " Ulfaldi, 46.

 Brynjúlf, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 99.

 Bucholly Castle, 122.

 Burghead, 115.

 Burial customs of the Northmen, cxvii.

 Burra Firth (Borgar Fiord) in Shetland, 60.

 Burrian, in N. Ronaldsay, xiv, xv.

 Burswick, 166.

 Bute (Bót), xlviii.


 Cæsar, 113.

 Caithness (Nes, Katanes), 2, 4, 8, 16, 18, 21, 23, 28, 29, 31-33, 35,
    37, 70, 72, 73, 86, 87, 91, 116, 121, 122, 134, 152, 154, 155, 158,
    160, 161, 164, 166, 169, 176, 180, 182, 193, 195, 196-200, 204, 206,
    207, 209.

 Calder (Kalfadal) in Caithness, 182, 187.
   " Burn of, 187.
   " Loch of, 187.

 Canisbay (Conansbæ), 3.

 Canterbury, lxxii, lxxiii.

 Canute (Knut) the Great, King, 16.
 Careston, 157.

 Carisness, Carness, 157.

 Cecilia, Erlend’s daughter, 47.

 Chester, Hugh, Earl of, 54.

 Cholmogori (Hólmgard, Novgorod), 24.

 Christ’s Kirk in Birsay, xxxiii, lxxi, xciii, xcv, 43, 44, 67, 112.

 Churches, ancient, of Orkney, lxxxvii.
   " round, of Britain, xciii.
   " towered, of Shetland, ci.

 Cleveland (Klifland), 47.

 Clontarf, battle of, xxvii, xxviii, xciii, 4.

 Cobbie Row (Holbein Hruga), lxxv, 126.

 Conchobhar (Konufogr), King, xxx, 7.

 Connaught (Kunnaktir), 57, 58.

 Constantinople (Mikligard), 24, 127, 148, 149, 150, 163.

 Cormac, x, xiii.

 Cornwall, xv.

 Cragy, James of, lxiii.

 Crete (Krit), 146, 147.

 Cufic coins, 127.

 Culbinsbrugh, Shetland, xv.

 Culen Induffson, King, 17.

 Cullen, in Banffshire, lv.

 Cumbria, 192.

 Cyder Hall (Siwardhoch), Sutherlandshire, 107.


 Dag, Elif’s son, 54.

 Dagfinn, Hlödver’s son, 74, 97, 100.

 Dal, in Caithness, 69.

 Dalir, in Caithness, 209.
   " (Argyle), 176, 181.

 Dalriad Scots, xi.

 Dalverja family, 181.

 Daminsey, Damisey (Damsay), Orkney, 92, 95, 169, 171.

 Dardanelles, 149.

 David I., King of Scots, lxxx, 70, 80, 108, 124, 125, 153.
   " II., lx.
   " son of Harald Maddadson, Earl, xliv, 192, 199.

 David, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvi.

 Deer, Book of, lxxx.

 Deerness (Dyrnes), Orkney, 5, 9, 19, 88, 156.
   " Brough of, and chapel at, xcix.
   " Parish Church of, c.

 Denmark, 29, 40, 42, 85, 98, 150.

 Dicuil, xi.

 Dolgfinn, Bishop of Orkney, lxxvi.

 Doll’s Cave, 77.

 Donald Bane, xxxiii, 56.

 Dornoch, lxxix, lxxxii, lxxxiii.

 Dornoch Firth, 21, 107.

 Dorrery, in Caithness, 187.

 Doune Castle, lxxi.

 Drómund, 142-146.

 Drontheim (Nidaros), 25, 57.

 Drummond, John de, lxvii.

 Dublin (Dýflin), xxi, xxiii, xxvii, 44, 189, 190, 199.

 Dúfeyrar (Duffus, Morayshire), 114, 123.

 Dufgall (Dugald) of the Isles, 181.

 Dufniall, 73.
   " Havard’s son, 120, 122.

 Duncan (Dungal), Earl of Duncansbæ, xxiii, 2.
   " Earl of Fife, xlii.
   " Crinan’s son, King of Scots, 17.
   " son of Malcolm Canmore, King of Scots, xxxiii, 46.

 Duncansbay (Dungalsbæ), xxiii, xxvi, 2, 18, 73, 91, 92, 116, 121, 122.

 Dunfermline, lxxx.

 Dungad, Dungal; _see_ Duncan.

 Dunkeld, lxxx.

 Dunnet Head, 33.

 Dunrossness, xiv.

 Durazzo, 150.

 Durness (Dyrness), Sutherlandshire, xlviii, lxxxiii.

 Dýflin; _see_ Dublin.

 Dynröst, 164.

 Dyrness (Deerness), in Orkney, 5, 9, 19, 88, 156.

 Dyrachium (Dýraksborg), 150.


 Eadburh, xxi.

 Ebissa, x.

 Edgar, King of Scots, xxxiv, 56.

 Edinburgh (Eidinaborg), xli, 163.

 Edward I., King of England, lxxxiv.

 Efjusund (Evie Sound), Orkney, 106.

 Egill Skalagrimson, cxi.

 Egilsey, 61, 63, 109, 113.
   " church of, xci, xciii, 63.

 Eilif, Archbishop of Nidaros (Drontheim), lxxvii.

 Einar of Gulberwick, 130.
   " Hardkiöpt, 208.
   " Klining, xxv, 207.
   " Rögnvald’s son, Earl; _see_ Torf Einar.
   " Skeif, 162, 163.
   " Thorfinn’s son (Rangmuth), Earl, xxix, 3, 4, 7, 9, 30, 31.
   " Thambarskelfir, 24.
   " Vorsakrák, 46.

 Eindridi Ungi, xxxvi, 126, 127, 133, 134, 137, 142, 157.

 Eirik Blodöxe, King, xxv, 2, 11, 207, 211.
   " Eymuni, King, 49, 85.
   " the Icelander, 116.
   " Slagbrellir, xxxviii, 70, 73, 164, 167, 179, 193.
   " Spaki, King, 49.
   " Stræta, 70.

 Ekkial (Oikel river), 21, 22, 107.

 Ekkialsbakki, xxiii, lxxix, cxii, cxvii, 21, 107, 115, 204.

 Elgin, chanonry church of, lxxxvi.

 Eller Holm (Hellisey), 103, 173, 174.

 Elon, Isle, 103.

 Ellisif, Queen, 47.

 Elwick Bay, xlvii.

 England, 28, 47, 56, 75, 98, 134, 135, 189.

 Engull (Angus of the Isles), 181.

 Enhallow (Eyin Helga), Orkney, xx, 177.

 Erlend, Einar’s son, Earl, xxv, 2, 207, 211.

 Erlend, Harald’s son (Ungi), Earl, xxxvii, cxi, 106, 151, 154, 156,
    158-160, 164, 166-168, 170, 171.
   " Thorfinn’s son, Earl, xxxiii, 30, 43, 47, 52, 54.

 Erling Erkidiákn, 47.
   " Erlend’s son, 47, 48, 54, 58.
   " Kyrpinga Orm’s son, 80, 127.
   " Skakki, 134, 139, 144, 145, 149-151, 163, 193.
   " Vidkunnson, lv.

 Erngisl Suneson, Earl of Orkney, lviii, lxii.

 Evie Sound (Efjusund), Orkney, 106.

 Eyarskeggiar, xxxix, 199.

 Eyin Helga; _see_ Enhallow.

 Eyrar Thing, 25.

 Eystein Glumra, 1.
   " Harald Gilli’s son, 126, 151-153, 157, 158.
   " Magnus’, son, King, xxxvii, lxxiii, 58, 59, 66.
   " Orri, 47, 48.

 Eysteinsdal, xliv, 198.

 Eyvind, Maelbrigdi’s son, 88, 92, 93, 94, 95.
   " Olnbogi, 54.
   " Urarhorn, 7, 14, 26.

 Fair Isle (Fridarey), xxxv, 74, 91, 97, 99-101, 164.

 Faroe Isles, xii, cxiii.

 Ferquhard, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvi.

 Ferne, Abbey of, lxxxvi.

 Fifa, 128, 129.

 Fife (Fifi), 22.

 Finn Arnason, 30.

 Finnleik, Earl, xxv, 210.

 Frith (Fiord), in Orkney, 92, 159.

 Flettuness (Glettuness), in Orkney, 74, 131.

 Floruvagar, in Norway, 85, 199.

 Fluguness, in Orkney, 74, 92.

 Flydruness, in Orkney, 74, 92.

 Foula, cxiii.

 Frákork, Moddan’s daughter, xxxv, 69-72, 85-88, 106, 110, 114-116, 156.

 Freswick (Thraswick), in Caithness, 154, 160.

 Frida, Kolbein Hruga’s daughter, 126, 191.

 Fridarey; _see_ Fair Isle.

 Frisic sea, x.

 Fugl, Liotolf’s son, 154, 155, 156.

 Fyrileif, in Norway, 84, 85.

 Gaddgedlar, 28.

 Gairsay (Gáreksey), 73, 119, 134, 158, 159, 172, 179, 188, 189, 191.

 Galicialand, 136, 140.

 Gallgael, 28.

 Gallipoli, 149.

 Galloway, 28.

 Gardariki (Russia), 24.

 Gáreksey; _see_ Gairsay.

 Gatnip, near Scapa, Orkney, 74, 110.

 Gauti of Skeggbjarnarstadir, 156.

 Gautland, 58.

 Gefsisness, in Orkney, 74.

 Geirbiörn, 135.

 Geitaberg, 74, 100.

 Gerard, Archbishop of York, lxxiii.

 Gibraltar, Straits of (Njörfasund), 141.

 Gigha (Gudey), island of, xlviii.

 Gilbert, Bishop of Hamar, xlviii.
   " Bishop of Caithness, lxxxii.

 Gilbride, Earl of Angus, xlvi.
   " Earl of Orkney, xlvii.

 Gillaodran, 180, 181.

 Gilli, Earl, xxviii.

 Gillichrist, 75, 76.

 Glaitness (Glettuness), 74, 131.

 Glumdrapa, 2.

 Goi, 98.

 Gorm the Old, King, cv.

 Gormlath (Hvarflod), xxxviii, xlii, 192.

 Graemsay (Grimsey), 107, 159.

 Gregorius Dagson, 151.

 Grelaug, xxiv, xxv, 2.

 Grim Kamban, xii.

 Grim of Swiney, 91, 92.
   " Ormson, lxxvii.

 Grímkell of Glettuness, 74, 131.

 Grimsby (Grimsbæ), 75, 76.

 Grimsey; _see_ Graemsay.

 Groa, xxiv, 2.

 Groeningiasund, 78.

 Gudifrey, 138, 142.

 Gudröd, King of Man and the Isles, 54.

 Gudrun, Frákork’s daughter, 69, 114.

 Gulberwick in Shetland (Gulberuvik), xxxvi, 127.

 Gullbeinir, 199.

 Gunhild, Erlend’s daughter, 57, 58, 83.
   " wife of Eirik Blodöxe, 207, 211.

 Gunnar Lambi’s son, xxviii.

 Gunni, Olaf’s son, 73, 91, 153, 154.

 Guthrod, son of Harald Harfagri, xxiv, 205.

 Guttorm, Sigurd’s son, Earl, xxiv, 1, 204.
   " Mol, 128.
   " Sperra, lix, lxv, lxvi.

 Gyrid, Dag’s daughter, 46.


 Hæretha-land, xxi.

 Haey; _see_ Hoy.

 Haflidi, Thorkel’s son, 105, 120, 122.
   " Steinson, priest, liv.

 Hafnarvag, 159.

 Hafursfiord, xxi.

 Hákirkia (Halkirk in Caithness), xliv, lxxix, 200.

 Hakon Athelstan’s foster-son, 207.
   " Barn, 126.
   " Brynjúlfson, 46.
   " Gallin, 200.
   " Hakonson, King, xlvii, xc.
   " Harald’s son, 188, 189.
   " Herdabreid, 151.
   " Ivar’s son, 46, 48, 50.
   " Karl, 59, 73, 95, 111, 170, 177.
   " Klo, 47, 70, 73, 110.

 Hakon Magnusson, King, xl, li.
   " the Norwegian, 49.
   " Paul’s son, Earl, xxxiii, xxxv, lxxiii, xcv, 46, 48, 50-54, 58-60.
   " Pik, 46, 73.

 Haldór Brynjúlfson, 46.

 Halfdan Hálegg, xxiv, 1, 205, 206, 211.

 Haliburton, Janet, lxiii.
     " Walter, lxiii.

 Halkel Huk, 84.

 Halkirk, in Caithness, xliv, lxxix, 200.

 Hall of Sida, 47.
   " Thórarinn’s son, 119.

 Hallad, Earl, xxiv, 203, 204.

 Halland, 85, 124.

 Hallvard, 9, 79, 80, 81.
   " Dúfa’s son, 182.

 Hálogaland, 55.

 Halsary, in Caithness, 187.

 Hanef Ungi, xlv.

 Harald of Borgarfiord, 60.
   " Gillichrist, King, 75, 83-85, 98, 126.
   " Godwinson, King, xxxiii, 47, 48.
   " Harfagri, xiii, xxi, 1, 2, 11, 53, 112, 203, 205, 207, 210, 211.
   " son of Earl John, xlv.
   " Maddadson, Earl, xxxv-lxvi, lxxx, cxi, 108, 134, 151, 153, 154,
      157-159, 163-165, 168, 170-179, 182-199.
   " Sigurdson (Hardradi), King, xxxii, 23, 40, 43, 44, 47, 48, 153.
   " Slettmali, Earl, xxxv, 49, 53, 69, 71, 72.
   " Ungi, Earl, xlii, 188, 193-195, 198.

 Hardicanute, xxxi, 29.

 Hauga Thing, 83.

 Hauga Heath in Rögnvaldsey, 207.

 Havard, 77-79.
   " Earl, xxv, cvi, cviii, 2, 207, 208, 211.
   " Gunnarson, 47, 49, 62, 73, 120, 131.

 Havardsteigar, 208.

 Hebrides (Sudreyar), 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 35, 37, 44, 53, 56, 64, 75,
    86, 95, 97, 105, 115, 120, 121, 153, 166, 177, 179, 189, 190, 195,
    196.

 Hebrista, Holm of, Shetland, 60.

 Hedin, cxiii.

 Heinrek, Emperor, 43.

 Helga, Harek’s daughter, 69, 71, 72.

 Helgi of Westrey, 74, 192.

 Helene Holm, Orkney, 103.

 Hellisey, 173.

 Helmsdale (Hjalmundal), 115.

 Henry, Bishop of Orkney, xlviii, lxxvi.
   " II., Bishop of Orkney, lxxxviii.
   " of Nottingan in Caithness, lxxxiv.

 Herbiörg, Paul’s daughter, 46, 73, 126.
   " Sigrid’s daughter, 46, 126.

 Herdis, Thorvald’s daughter, lxvi.

 Hernur, 98.

 Hiluge, cxiv.

 Hildina, cxiv.

 Hjalp, 128, 129.

 Hjalmundal; _see_ Helmsdale.

 Hjaltland; _see_ Shetland.

 Hjaltlanders, 99, 100, 130.

 Hlifolf, 65.
   " Alli, 196.

 Hlödver, Thorfinn’s son, Earl, xxvi, 2, 3, 209, 211.

 Hofn, in Westray (Pierowall), 102.
   " in Caithness (Huna), xxvi, 209.

 Hofsness, 156.

 Hogboy (Haugbui), ci.

 Hogni, cxiii.

 Holdbodi, Hundi’s son, 64, 95, 96, 116, 118, 120, 121.

 Holderness (Hallarness), 47.

 Holm of Houston, 159.

 Hólmgard (Novgorod), 24, 25.

 Hördaland (Hæretha-land), xxi, 48, 80, 151.

 Höskuld, 183, 184.

 Hoy (Haey), cxiii, 3, 74, 91, 105, 107.

 Hoxa, How of, in S. Ronaldsay, 207.

 Hrafn the Red, xxix.

 Hrafnseyri (Ravensere), 48.

 Hreppisness (Rapness) in Westray, 177.

 Hróald, 122.

 Hródbjart, 116.

 Hrólf, priest, 113.
   " Nefia, 203.
   " Rögnvald’s son (Gönguhrolf), 203, 205, 206.

 Hrólfsey (Rousay), 73, 88, 105, 106, 107, 171, 177.

 Hrollaug, 203, 205, 206.

 Hrossey (the Mainland), Orkney, xxviii, 5, 36, 49, 60, 67, 74, 89, 102,
    104, 105, 106, 107, 159, 164, 175, 178.

 Hugh the Bold, Earl of Montgomery, xxxiv, 54.
   " the Stout, Earl of Chester, xxxiv, 54.
   " Earl of Ross, lvi.

 Huipness, 156.

 Hundi, Earl, xxvi.
   " Sigurd’s son, 3, 212.

 Hvarflod (Gormlath), xxxviii, xlii, 192.

 Hvera (the Wear), 134.

 Ibn Fozlan’s narrative, cxviii.

 Iceland, xii.

 Icelander, 117.

 Il; _see_ Isla.

 Imbolum, 148, 149.

 Inganess, Orkney, xlvii.

 Ingelram, Archbishop of Dunkeld, lxxxvi.

 Ingi, Bard’s son, King, 199.
   " Harold, Gilli’s son, King, 126, 127, 151.
   " Steinkel’s son, King, 49, 50, 52.

 Ingibiorg, Benedikt’s daughter, 46.
   " Earl’s mother, xxxi, xxxiii, 30, 43, 45, 48.
   " Erling’s daughter, li, liii.
   " Eirik’s daughter, cv.
   " Hakon’s daughter, 195.
   " Moddan’s daughter, 69.
   " Ragna, 46, 70, 73.

 Ingigerd, Queen, 25.
   " Harald’s daughter, 47.
   " Olaf’s daughter, 73, 156.
   " Rögnvald’s daughter, cv, 188.

 Ingilbert Lyning, lxxvii.

 Ingimar, Swein’s son, 83, 84.

 Ingirid, Kol’s daughter, 58, 83.
   " Olaf’s daughter, 114, 121.
   " Paul’s daughter, 46.
   " Thorkel’s daughter, 155.

 Ingulf, xii.

 Inispatrick, xxi.

 Invernairn, xli.

 Iona, xiii, xxi.

 Ireland (Irland), 4, 7, 21, 27, 29, 44, 53, 107, 189, 195, 210.

 Isla, xxxviii

 Islendingabók, xiii.

 Istambol, 148.

 Ivar Galli, 193.
   " son of Rögnvald, Earl of Moeri, xxii.

 Ivist (Uist), xxxiv.

 Jala (Yell), in Shetland, 86.

 James I., King of Scotland, lxi.
   " II., " " lxi.
   " III., " " lxx.

 Jamtaland, 23, 25.

 Jarizleif, King, 24, 25.

 Jatvor, 47, 74, 110.

 Jellinge in Denmark, cv.

 Jerusalem (Jórsalaheim), 59, 68, 71, 128, 130, 134, 147, 154.

 Jofreyr, Bishop of Orkney, lxxv.

 John, Bishop of Athole, 113.
   " " of Caithness, xliii, lxxx, 196, 197, 200.
   " " of Orkney, lxxviii.
   " Earl of Orkney, xlix, lv.
   " of Courcy, xlii.
 John Comnenus, Emperor, 150.
   " Hallkell’s son, 199.
   " son of Harald Maddadson, Earl, xliv, 199.
   " Earl of Sutherland, lxxxiii.
   " Pétrsson (Fót), 76-83, 98, 105, 128, 131, 139, 144, 149.
   " Vœng, 74, 105, 170, 174, 176, 177.

 Jórfiara; _see_ Orfjara.

 Jordan, 68, 147, 148.

 Jorsala-farers, xxxvi, ciii, cv.

 Jórsalaheim; _see_ Jerusalem.

 Jorsalaland (Palestine), 147, 148.

 Jutland, 40.

 Kalf Arnason, 24, 30, 32, 33, 34, 42.
   " Skurfa, 204, 205.

 Kalfadal in Caithness (Calder), 182, 183.

 Kalfadalsá (Calder Water), 187.

 Kali, Kol’s son (Earl Rögnvald II.), xxxv, 58, 75-79, 83.
   " Hundason; _see_ Karl.
   " Snæbiorn’s son, 54, 55, 57.

 Kari, xxviii.

 Karl Hundason, xxx, 17, 18.

 Karston, 157.

 Katanes; _see_ Caithness.

 Katharina, Countess of Caithness, lv.

 Ketil Flatnef, xxii.

 Kiarval, King of Dublin, xxvi, 209.

 Kintradwell, Sutherlandshire, 197.

 Kintyre (Satiri), xxxiv, cxii, 21, 56, 195.

 Kirkiboll, Sutherlandshire, 18.

 Kirkiuvag; _see_ Kirkwall.

 Kirk o’ Taing, Caithness, 33.

 Kirkwall (Kirkiuvag), lxxxvii, lxxxix, 37, 39, 41, 99, 110, 155, 157,
    158, 163, 170, 171, 179.

 Kjárekstadir, 157, 160.

 Kjölen Mountains, 23, 25.

 Klifland, 47.

 Kol of Halland, 128.
   " Isak’s son, 47.
   " Kali’s son, xxxv, lxxxviii, 57, 58, 75, 79, 80, 83, 85, 86, 90, 98,
      100, 111.

 Kolbein Hruga, lxxv, xcvii, cxxiii, 46, 126, 177.
   " Karl, 126.

 Konufogr (Conchobhar), King, 7.

 Kormak, Archdeacon of Sudreyar, lxxvi.

 Knut (Canute) the Great, King, 16.
   " the Wealthy, 161.

 Kristín, Sigurd’s daughter, 151.

 Kugi of Westrey, 73, 91, 96, 101, 102-104.

 Kunnaktir (Connaught), 57, 58.

 Kyle Scow, Sutherlandshire, 182.
   " of Sutherland (Ekkialsbakki), xxiii, lxxix, cxii, 21, 107, 115.
   " of Tongue, 18.

 Kyrpinga Orm, 80.

 Ladoga (Aldeigiuborg), 24.

 Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, lxxii.

 Largs, battle of, xlviii.

 Larne, Lough (Ulfreksfiord), 7.

 Lambaborg, 122, 125, 155, 159, 160.

 Laufandaness, 5.

 Laurentius, priest, xlii.
   " Bishop of Hole, lxxvii.

 Leif, xii.

 Lewis (Liodhus), xxxiv, 54, 118, 154, 155, 177.

 Lifolf Skalli, 193, 194.

 Liodhus; _see_ Lewis.

 Liot, Earl, xxv, 209, 211.
   " Níding, 69, 70.

 Liotolf, 106, 154, 159.

 Lingrow, 74.

 Linlithgow, palace of, lxxi.

 Lisbon, 140.

 Lochloy, xli.

 Lodbrok, cvi.

 Logierait, xxxvi.

 Lögman Gudrodson, 54.

 Lödver; _see_ Hlödver.

 Lomberd, xliii.

 Lopness, in Sanday, 5.

 Lubeck, lii.

 Lundy island, 117, 118.

 Lybster, in Caithness, 91.
   " in Reay, Caithness, church of, xcvii.

 Macbeth, xxv, 43, 209.

 Macgarvey, battle of, xxxix.

 Maddad, Earl of Athole, xxxvi, cxi, 86, 105, 108, 113, 115, 153.

 Moddan, 69.
   " Eindridi, 69.

 Maeshow, ci, cv, 159.

 Maeyar (Isle of May), 123.

 Magbiód, xxv, 209.

 Magnus Barelegs, King, xxxiii, 52-55, 58, 66, 75.
   " Erlend’s son, Earl (St. Magnus), xxiv, 47, 48, 52, 54, 55, 58,
      59-66, 71, 83, 95, 99, 105.
   " Erlingson, King, xxxix, 151, 193, 199.
   " Eyvind’s son, 95.
   " Gilbride’s son, Earl, xlvi, xlvii, xlix.
   " Harald’s son, King, 48.
   " Havard’s son, 47, 73, 91, 131, 134, 185.
   " John’s son, Earl, liv.
   " Magnusson, Earl, xlix.
   " Mangi, 188, 193.
   " Olaf’s son, King (the Good), xxxi, 24-26, 30-32, 34-36, 39-41, 43,
      48.
   " Orfi, 72.
   " Orm, 69.
   " Sigurd’s son, King (the Blind), 83, 84.

 Mainland (Meginland) of Orkney (Hrossey), xxviii, 5, 36, 49, 60, 67,
    74, 89, 102, 104, 105, 106, 107, 159, 164, 175, 178.

 Malbrigd, xxiii, 107, 203, 204.

 Malcolm, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvi.
   " Scottish Earl, xxvii.
   " II. (Melkolf), King of Scots, xxix, xxxiii, 3, 16, 44, 212.
   " Canmore (Langhals), 46, 55, 71, 86.
   " the Maiden, 108, 153, 154, 155, 180, 181, 192.
   " M’Heth, Earl of Moray, xxxviii, xlii, 181, 192.

 Malise, Earl of Stratherne, lv.
   " the Younger, lvi.
   " Sperra, lx.

 Malvoisin, Bishop of St. Andrews, lxxxi.

 Man, Isle of, 116, 118, 203.

 Mani, Olaf’s son, 196.

 Manuel I., Emperor, 150.

 Margad, Grim’s son, 74, 91, 92, 122, 124, 125, 169, 170.

 Margaret, Hakon’s daughter, xxxvii, cxi, 72, 86, 105, 108, 109, 153,
    154, 161.
   " Moddan’s daughter, 69.
   " the Maiden of Norway, xlix, l, xci.
   " the false Maiden of Norway, l, lii.

 Maria, Harald’s daughter, 47.

 Mariuhofn, 179.

 Marseilles (Marselia), 142.

 Maurice de Moravia, lvii.

 May, Isle of, 123, 124, 163.
   " Monastery of, 124.

 Medalland’s hofn (Midland harbour), in Orkney, 159.

 Melbrigd; _see_ Malbrigd.

 Melkolf; _see_ Malcolm.

 Melsnati, xxvi.

 Menelaus, Emperor, 150.

 Menteith, Johanna de, lvii.
   " Sir John de, lvii.

 Menzies, Sir David, lxviii.

 Mikligard (Constantinople), 24, 127, 148-150, 163.

 Moddan, 17, 20.

 Montgomery, Hugh, Earl of, 54.

 Moors, 140.

 Moravia, Maurice de, lvii.
   " Sir John de, lvii.
 Moray (Mærhæfi), 21, 204.
   " Firth (Breidafiord), 20, 21.

 Morukari (Morkere), 47.

 Moseyarborg; _see_ Mousa.

 Moslems, 141.

 Moulhead of Deerness, 88, 156.

 Mousa, Borg of (Moseyarborg), cix, cxi, 113, 161.

 Mowat of Bucholly, 122.

 Murcadh, son of Brian Borumha, xxviii.

 Muirceartach, xxxiv.

 Murdoch, Duke of Albany, lxx.

 Munkalif, monastery of, lxxv.

 Myrkhol (Murkle), in Caithness, xxv, 195, 207.

 Mýrkiartan, 56.

 Myrkvifiörd, 124, 181.

 Navidale, xiv.

 Nennius, x.

 Ness (Caithness), 8, 37, 87, 116, 121, 122, 155, 158, 160, 164, 166,
    169, 180, 195, 209.
   " river, x.

 Nicolas, Abbot of Scone, lxxxiii.
   Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvi.

 Nidaros (Drontheim), 25, 57.

 Njal’s burning, xxviii.

 Njörfasund (Straits of Gibraltar), 141, 142.

 Norfolk, round-towered churches of, xciii.

 Normandy, lxxxix, 203.

 Northumberland (Nordymbraland), 134.

 Norway, 2, 3, 8, 12, 16, 26, 32, 35, 42, 47-49, 52, 54, 58, 75, 85, 86,
    90, 105, 126, 127, 131, 133, 150-152, 161, 164.

 Novgorod (Hólmgard), 24, 25.

 Nottingan, in Caithness, lxxxiv.

 Ochtha, x.

 Oddi Litli, 130, 131, 147.

 Odin, xiii, cxiv, cxvii, 206.

 Offa, King, 21.

 Ogmund Dreng, 151.

 Ogmund, Kyrpinga, Orm’s son, 80, 127.
   " Thorfinn’s son, 151.

 Olaf Bitling, King of Sudreyar, 181.
   " Haraldson, King (the Holy), xxx, 8, 11, 14-16, 26, 38.
   " Kyrri, King, 48, 49, 93.
   " Magnusson, King, 58.
   " the Stout, 50.
   " Rolf’s son, 74, 88, 89, 91, 92, 94.
   " Swein’s son, 177, 192.
   " Tryggvi’s son, King, xxvii, xcii, 3, 4, 11, 117, 210, 211, 212.
   " the White, xxi, xxiii, 203.

 Olvir Rosta, 69, 72, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 110, 114-116.

 Onund, King, 23.

 Ord of Caithness, 115, 165.

 Orfjara (Orphir), 71, 92, 95, 159, 167, 168.

 Orkahaug, ci, cv, 159.

 Orkhill, 159.

 Orkneys (Orkneyar), 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 11, 14-16, 23, 26, 28, 29, 32, 36,
    42, 47, 48, 52, 56, 58, 62, 64, 66, 68, 69, 72, 75, 85, 86, 98-100,
    105, 106, 109, 114, 116, 121, 125, 126, 131, 132, 134, 140, 147,
    151, 152, 156, 157, 163, 164, 178, 188, 189, 196, 203, 205, 207,
    210.

 Orkneymen (Orkneyingar), 2, 69, 112, 124, 132, 133, 134, 139, 191, 207.

 Orm, 170.

 Orphir (Orfjara, Jórfiara), 71, 92, 95, 159, 167, 168.

 Osloe (now Christiania), 83.

 Osmondwall (Asmundarvag), xxvii, 3, 8.

 Ottar, Earl, 72, 106, 153, 157.
   " Svarti, 16.

 Papas, xii.

 Papey, xii, xx, 96.
   Meiri (Papa Westray), 38, 39.
 Papey Minni (Papa Stronsay), xxxii, 38.

 Papuli (Papley), xii, xx, 38, 58, 59, 73, 95, 167.

 Patrick, Bishop of Orkney, lxxviii.

 Paris, University of, 131.

 Paul Hakonsson (Umálgi) Earl, xxxv, xcv, 69, 71-73, 83, 85-98, 104-111,
    183.
   " Thorfinnson, Earl, xxxiii, lxxii, 30, 43, 44, 52, 54.

 Pentland Firth (Petlandsfiord), 18, 33, 34, 74, 86, 88, 92, 106, 113,
    152, 155, 165, 193, 194, 196.
   " Skerries (Petlandsker), lv.

 Peter, Bishop of Orkney, lxxvi.

 Pictish Towers, cix, cxxii, cxxiii, 33, 113, 161.

 Pierowall (Hofn), in Westray, cxxii, 102.

 Pull, Puglia (Apulia), 150.

 Rafn, Lawman, 196, 200, 201.

 Ragna of Rinansey, 73, 96, 97, 119, 120.

 Ragnhild, Eirik’s daughter, xxv, 193, 207, 208, 211.
   " Hrólf’s daughter, 203.
   " Ingimar’s daughter, 154.
   " Paul’s daughter, 46.
   " Simon’s daughter, 60.

 Ralph, Bishop of Orkney, lxxii.

 Rapness, 74, 177.

 Rattar Brough (Raudabiorg), 33.
   " Burn of, 33.

 Raudabiorg, xxxi, 33, 45.

 Ravenscraig, lxxi.

 Ravensere (Hrafnseyri), 48.

 Reginald, Bishop of Rosemarkie, xlii, lxxx.
   " of the Isles, xlii, xliv.

 Reindeer in Scotland, 182.

 Scalpeid, 69.

 Renfrew, 181.

 Rendale (Rennadal), 170, 171.

 Reppisness, 74.

 Restalrig, 197.

 Richard I., King, 142.

 Rikgard of Brekkur, 74, 105.
   " priest, 78.
   " Thorleif’s son, 120.

 Rinansey, Rínarsey (N. Ronaldsay), xv, cxvii, 1, 73, 91, 96, 97, 100,
    119, 152, 165.

 Rinar’s Hill, 206.

 Robert, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvii.

 Roger, Bishop of St. Andrews, xliii.
   " Bishop of Orkney, lxxiii.

 Rögnvald Brúsi’s son, Earl, xxxi, lxxiv, 7, 11, 15, 23, 24-26, 28, 30,
    31-39, 44.
   " Eirikson, 183.
   " (Kali) Kol’s son, Earl, xxxv-xxxvii, lxxxviii, xc, 58, 75-79,
      83-91, 96, 97, 100, 102, 104, 105, 108-114, 118-154, 158, 163,
      165-172, 175-184, 188, 192, 193, 199.
   " Earl of Moeri, xxiv, 1, 203, 204, 210.
   " (Reginald) of the Isles, xlii, xliv, lxxx, 181, 195.

 Rögnvaldsey (S. Ronaldsay), 89, 91, 165, 166, 175, 176, 194.

 Ronaldsay, North; _see_ Rinansey.

 Rögnvaldsvoe, xlvii.

 Rome (Rómaborg), xxxii, xxxv, xxxvii, lxxi, 43, 63, 68, 150.

 Rorvag, 3.

 Ross, 18, 21, 199.
   " Hugh de, lxi.
   " Hugh, Earl of, lvi, lxi.
   " John of, lxx.
   " William, Earl of, lvi, lxi.

 Rouen (Ruda), 203.

 Rousay (Hrólfsey), 73, 88, 91, 105, 106, 107, 171, 177.

 Roxburgh Castle, xliv, 192.

 Runic inscriptions, ciii, cxv, cxvi.

 Rurik, King, 24.

 Russia (Gardariki), 24.

 St. Adamnan, xx.

 St. Anschar, lxxiii.

 St. Brigid, xiv.

 St. Columba, x, xiii, xiv, 82.

 St. Clair, Alexander, lxi.
   " David, lxvii.
   " Elisabeth, lxvii.
   " Henry, ballivus of King Robert Bruce, lv, lxi.
   " Henry, Earl, xl, lx.
   " Isabella, lxii, lxvii.
   " John, lxviii.
   " Lucia, lxi.
   " Thomas, lxi.
   " William, Earl, lxi, lxix.

 St. Kilda, cxxi.

 St. Lawrence, xv.

 St. Magnus, xv, lxxii, lxxxix, xc, xciii, xcv, cxv, 99.
   " church of, xxxv, lxxiv, lxxxviii, 112, 173, 178, 188.

 St. Mary’s, in the Scilly Isles, 179.

 St. Ninian, xiv, xx.

 St. Olaf, xv.
   " church of, Kirkwall, lxxxix.

 St. Oran’s chapel, Iona, xxxiv.

 St. Patrick’s church, Down, xxxiv.

 St. Peter, xv.

 St. Peter’s church, S. Ronaldsay, xviii.
   " Brough of Birsay, xcviii.
   " Weir, xcvii.

 St. Regulus, 197.

 St. Sunniva, lxxvii.

 St. Triduana (Tredwell), xiv, 197.

 St. Vigeans, xx.

 Sanday, 5, 104, 174.

 Sandwick (Sandvik), in Deerness, Orkney, xxx, 5, 9, 169.

 Saracens, 144.

 Sardinia, 142.

 Satiri (Kintyre), 21, 56, 195.

 Saxi, 81.

 Saxland, 43.

 Saverough, xiv.

 Savigny, 192.

 Scapa (Scalpeid), xlviii, 74, 92, 110, 155, 166, 180.

 Scarborough (Skardaborg), 47.

 Scrabster (Skarabolstadr), xliii, lxxxiii, 196.

 Scilly Islands (Syllingar), 117, 179.

 Scone, lxxii, 108, 192.

 Scotland (Skotland), 2, 17, 21-23, 28-31, 53, 60, 64, 70, 72, 75, 86,
    105, 109, 114, 118, 152, 161, 210.

 Scotland’s Firth (Skotlandsfiord), 27, 56, 115, 180.

 Sculptured stones of Scotland, symbols of, xix.

 Scytheboll (Skibo), 107.

 Sekkr, 151.

 Seley, 40.

 Sepulchre, church of the Holy, xciii.

 Serk, 54, 76.

 Serkland, 142, 146.

 Serlo, monk of Newbottle, xliv, lxxxi.

 Setr, 76.

 Shetland (Hjaltland), 14, 16, 22, 32, 35, 36, 47, 60, 67, 86-89, 91,
    97, 99, 102, 130, 133, 155, 161, 164, 176, 178, 203, 205, 210.

 Shurrery, in Caithness, 187.

 Siddera, Sutherlandshire, 107.

 Sigæum, promontory of, 149.

 Sigmund Brestisson, 88, 89.
   " Ongul, 139, 147, 148.

 Sigtrygg, King, xxvii.

 Sigurd, Andrew’s son, 116.
   " Archbishop of Drontheim, lxxvi.
   " Arnkell’s son, 92.
   " Eystein’s son, Earl, xxiii, cxvii, 1, 107, 199, 204.
   " Harald Gilli’s son, 151.
   " Havard Hold’s son, 151.
   " Hlödver’s son, Earl, xxv, xxvi, 3, 4, 11, 112, 209, 210, 211, 212.
   " Hrani’s son, 54.
   " Klaufi, 155.
   " Magnusson (the Jorsala-farer), King, xxxiv, lxxiii,
 Sigurd Murt, xli, 193, 194.
   " Slembir, 70, 71.
   " Sneis, 57, 75.
   " Syr, King, 5.
   " of Gloucester, 127.
   " of Papuli, 59, 73.
   " of Westness, 46, 70, 87, 91, 109, 110, 111.

 Sigurdhaug (Siwardhoch), cxvii, 107.

 Sinclair; _see_ St. Clair.

 Skaill, 33.

 Skálpeid (Scapa), xlviii, 74, 92, 110, 155, 166, 180.

 Skaney, 42.

 Skapti, 54.

 Skarabolstadr (Scrabster), near Thurso, xliii, lxxxiii, 196.

 Skebro Head, 156.

 Skeggbjarnarhöfdi, 156.

 Skeggbjarnarstadir, 156.

 Skida Myre (Skitten), in Caithness, xxvi, 112, 209, 210.

 Skinnet, church, of, in Caithness, lxxxii.

 Skuli, Earl, xxv, 2, 209, 211.

 Skye (Skidh), xxxiv, 27, 28, 192.

 Snæfrida, 205.

 Snækoll Gunnason, xlvi, 126.

 Snorri Sturluson, 58.

 Sogn, 54, 76, 80.

 Sölmund, 75, 77-82, 84, 86, 98, 105, 140.

 Spain (Spánland), 140, 141.

 Stamford Bridge, xxxiii, 40.

 Staur (Ru Stœr), 167.

 Stefán Radgafi, 180.

 Steigar Thórir, 98.

 Steinsnes (Stennis), in Orkney, xxv, cvii, cviii, 61, 157, 159, 208.

 Steinvor the Stout, 69, 72.

 Stewart, Alan, lxi.
   " David, lx.
   " Walter, lxi.

 Stiklestadir, 23, 38, 118.

 Stratherne, Elizabeth de, lxiii.

 Stratherne, Euphemia de, lxi.
   " Malise, Earl of, lv-lx.
   " Marjory de, lviii.
   " Matilda de, lviii.

 Strickathro, 192.

 Stroma (Straumsey), 91, 96, 176.

 Stromness, 157.

 Stronsay (Stiórnsey), 156.

 Studla, 80, 81.

 Sudreyar (Hebrides), xxii, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 35, 37, 44, 53, 56, 64,
    75, 86, 95, 97, 105, 115, 120, 121, 153, 166, 177, 179, 189, 190,
    195, 196, 203, 210.

 Sudreyarmen, 116, 118.

 Sumarlidi Hold, 176, 180, 181, 192.
   " Kolbein Hruga’s son, 126.
   " Thorfinn’s son, Earl, xxix, 3, 4.

 Sumburgh, 74.
   " Head, 164.
   " Roost (Dynröst), 164.

 Sutherland (Sudrland), 4, 17, 18, 21, 70, 115, 116, 123, 164.

 Svelgr; _see_ Swelkie.

 Sverrir, King, xxxix, xli, 199.

 Svöldr, 4.

 Swefney; _see_ Swona.

 Swein Asleifson, xxxvi, xc, 5, 73, 91-95, 97, 105, 106, 108-110,
    113-125, 133, 151, 155, 156, 158, 164-166, 168-181, 188-190.
   " Blakari’s son, 172.
   " Brióstreip, 87, 89, 93-95, 97, 111.
   " Harald’s son, 119.
   " Hróald’s son, 131, 134, 186.
   " Ulf’s son, King, xxxii, 39, 42, 43.

 Swelkie of Stroma (Svelgr), xlviii, 107.

 Sweden, 23, 49.

 Swona (Swefney, Swiney), 74, 91, 92.

 Swynbrocht, 74.
 Syllingar (Scilly Isles), 117, 179.

 Sytheraw, 107.

 Tankerness (Tannskarunes), 88.

 Tarbatness (Torfnes), 21.

 Thiálbi, King, 57.

 Thing, 6, 61, 73, 83, 110, 112, 135, 158.

 Thingstead, Thingavöll, 61, 171.

 Thiostolf, Ali’s son, 83, 84, 85.

 Thomas, Archbishop of York, lxxiii.
   " de Fingask, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxvi.
   " Tulloch, Bishop of Orkney, xlvi, lxviii, lxxviii.

 Thony, Robert de, lviii.

 Thora, Paul’s daughter, 46.
   " Sumarlidi’s daughter, 47, 73.

 Thórarinn Breidmagi, 119.
   " Killinef, 179.

 Thorberg Svarti, 131.

 Thorbiörn of Borgarfiord, 60.
   " Hornklofi, 2.
   " Klerk, xxxviii, 69, 72, 114, 118, 119, 120-123, 125, 156, 159, 165,
      167-180, 183-185.
   " Svarti, 147.

 Thordis, Hall’s daughter, 47.

 Thore Hakonson, li, liii.

 Thórir Thegiandi (the Silent), 203, 206.
   " Tréskegg, 204, 205.

 Thorfinn Bessason, 156, 157.
   " Harald’s son, xliv, 192, 198.
   " Hausakliuf, Earl, xxiv, xxv, 2, 3, 207, 208.
   " Sigurd’s son, Earl, xxix-xxxiii, lxxii, xciii, xcv, 4-9, 12, 14,
      15, 18, 19, 26, 28, 29-45, 67, 179, 212.

 Thorgeir Skotakoll, 131.

 Thórhall, Asgrim’s son, 152.

 Thorkel Flettir, 74, 88, 96, 120.
   " Fóstri, Amundi’s son, xxx, 5-9, 13, 18, 19, 20, 22, 38.
   " Sumarlidi’s son, 71.

 Thorleif; _see_ Frákork.
   " Spaki, 54.

 Thorliót, 69.

 Thorolf, Bishop, lxxii.

 Thorsa, Thórsey; _see_ Thurso.

 Thorsdal, 182.

 Thorstein of Fluguness, 74, 92.
   " Havard’s son, 47, 73, 91, 104, 186.
   " Hold, 69, 72, 114, 118, 126.
   " Krokauga, 74, 131.
   " Ragna’s son, 73, 100, 101, 104, 119, 160.
   " son of Hall of Sida, xxix.
   " the Red, xxiii, 2, 203.

 Thorvald Thoresson, 60.

 Thrasness, 136.

 Thraswick (Freswick), in Caithness, 154.

 Thule, xi.

 Thurso (Thorsa), 20, 73, 106, 152, 153, 159, 164, 165, 183, 194.

 Thussasker, 44.

 Tingwall, in Rendal, 61.

 Tiree (Tyrvist), xxxiv, 95.

 Torf Einar, Earl, xxiv, cxvii, 1, 2, 112, 203, 205, 207, 211.

 Torfness, 21, 22, 152, 205.

 Tröllhæna, 197.

 Tunsberg, 75, 83, 84.

 Turgot, Bishop of St. Andrews, lxxiii.

 Tyrvist; _see_ Tiree.

 Uist (Ivist), xxxiv.

 Uladstir; _see_ Ulster.

 Ulfreksfiord, xxx, 7.

 Ulli, Strath, 115.

 Ulbster, in Caithness, xx.

 Ulster (Uladstir), xxxiv, 58.

 Uni, 80, 81, 99-102.

 Unn, 76, 77.

 Uppland, in Hoy, 74, 105.
 Upsala, 120.

 Værings, 127, 150.

 Vagaland (Walls), in Hoy, 167, 169, 176.

 Valdimar, King, 151.

 Valland, 135.

 Valkyriar, xxvii.

 Valthióf, Earl, 47, 125, 126.
   " Olafson, 73, 91, 93, 96, 114.

 Varangians, 127, 150.

 Veradal, 25.

 Verbon (Nerbon), 135, 145.

 Vidivag (Widewall), 166.

 Vidkunn Jonsson, 54.

 Vigr (Weir), island of, 126.

 Vik, in Norway, 40, 78, 85, 151.
   in Caithness (Wick), 118, 122, 154, 155.

 Vikings, xxii, xxiv, xxxvi, cxxi, 1, 25, 29, 33, 35, 59, 113.

 Volga, cxviii, cxxiii.

 Völuness, 174.

 Walls (Vagaland), in Hoy, 167, 169, 176.

 Walter, Bishop of Caithness, lxxxiii.

 Wales (Bretland), xv, 7, 54, 56, 117.

 Warrenne, John de, Earl of Surrey, lvi.

 Wear (Hvera), river, 134.

 Weir (Vigr), island of, 126.

 Weir, church of, xcvi.
   " castle of, cxxiii, 126.

 Westness, in Rousay, 46, 70, 73, 91, 101, 109.

 Westray, cxvii, cxxii, 74, 91, 96, 102, 177.

 Wick (Vik), in Caithness, 118, 122, 154, 155.

 William the Old, Bishop of Orkney, xxxvi, lxxii, lxxiv, lxxxix, xcv,
    68, 95-97, 105, 109, 111, 113, 131, 134, 137, 143, 144, 150.
   " II., Bishop of Orkney, lxxv, 193.
   " III., Bishop of Orkney, lxxvi.
   " IV., Bishop of Orkney, lxxvii.
   " V., Bishop of Orkney, lxxviii.
   " Tulloch, lxxix.
   " Bishop of Caithness, lxxxiii.
   " Earl of Ross, lvi.
   " Fitz Duncan, 46.
   " Freskyn, xlvi.
   " of Egremont, xxxviii, 46, 181.
   " the Lion, King of Scots, xxxix, xl, lxxx, 193, 195.

 Wimund, Bishop, xxxvii, 181, 192.

 Wulstan, Bishop, lxxii.

 York (Yorvik), 47.

 Yell (Jala), 86.

 Yell Sound (Alasund), 86.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               Footnotes


-----

Footnote 1:

  Writing of the barrows and cairns of Orkney, Captain Thomas states
  that at least 2000 might still be numbered. We have no estimate of the
  number in Shetland, but there also they are very numerous. Not less
  remarkable is the number of the early “dwellings of strength,” of
  which Mousa is the type—huge edifices, constructed with amazing labour
  and wonderful skill. (See under Maeshow and Mousa.)

Footnote 2:

  The Frisic Sea is supposed to mean the Firth of Forth.

Footnote 3:

  The “Historia Britonum” of Nennius (whoever he may have been) is
  believed, on what seems reliable evidence, to have been written about
  A.D. 858. (See the Irish Nennius, Irish Archæological Society, p. 18.)

Footnote 4:

  Ireland was then called Scotia.

Footnote 5:

  St. Ninian was commemorated at Dunrossness in Shetland (Sibbald’s
  Description, 1711, p. 15); at Stove in South Ronaldsay, Orkney
  (Peterkin’s Rentals, No. III.); at the north head of the bay of Wick
  in Caithness; and at Navidale in Sutherland. St. Columba’s three
  chapels in South Ronaldsay were at Grymness, Hopay, and Loch of
  Burwick (Peterkin’s Rentals, No. III. p. 86). There were also
  dedications to St. Columba in the islands of Sanday and Hoy in Orkney,
  at Olrig and Dirlet in Caithness, on Island Comb, at Tongue, and at
  Kilcalmkill in Sutherlandshire (Bishop Forbes’s Calendar of Scottish
  Saints). St. Triduana, whose name has been corrupted into St. Tredwell
  and St. Trudlin (the Tröllhæna of the Saga), had dedications in Papa
  Westray in Orkney (Martin’s and Brand’s Descriptions), and at
  Kintradwell in Sutherlandshire. It seems also, from the narrative of
  Bishop John’s mutilation in the Saga, that there was a dedication to
  her near Thurso. St. Brigid had chapels in Stronsay and Papa Stronsay
  in Orkney. But it is impossible to tell how many of these early
  religious sites had similar dedications, as scarcely a tithe of those
  that are known have preserved their names. Brand and Sibbald both
  mention the fact that in their time there were still recognisable the
  sites of 24 chapels in the island of Unst, 21 in the island of Yell,
  10 or 11 in the island of Fetlar: 55 religious foundations in the
  three most northerly islands of the Shetland group. The Christian
  period of the Norse occupation is marked by dedications showing the
  influence of the Crusades or of the national religious feeling. The
  dedications to the Holy Cross, St. Mary, St. Peter, St. Lawrence, St.
  Olaf, and St. Magnus, are probably all of this period.

Footnote 6:

  Unfortunately, the readings of these inscriptions which have been
  attempted are far from satisfactory. The Shetland and Orkney specimens
  are in different styles of the Ogham writing, and the whole subject of
  the reading and interpretation of the inscriptions in this character
  is beset with difficulties of no ordinary kind. One rendering of the
  Bressay inscription makes it “the cross of Natdod’s daughter here,”
  and on the other edge of the stone, “Benres of the sons of the Druids
  here;” while the language is supposed to be a mixture of Celtic and
  Icelandic. (Sculptured Stones of Scotland, vol. i. p. 30.)

Footnote 7:

  Sculptured Stones of Scotland (Spalding Club), by John Stuart, LL.D.,
  _passim_.

Footnote 8:

  Sir James Simpson’s reading of the inscription, given in the
  Sculptured Stones of Scotland, vol. ii. p. 71.

Footnote 9:

  In Orkney we have the islands of Papa Westray and Papa Stronsay (the
  _Papey meiri_ and _Papey minni_, or greater and lesser Papa of the
  Saga), Paplay in South Ronaldsay, Paplay in the parish of Holm, and
  Papdale, near Kirkwall, in the Mainland. In Shetland we have the isles
  of Papa—Papa Stour (_Papey stora_) and Papa Little (_Papey litla_),
  and Papill in the islands of Unst and Yell. Papa Stronsay, Papa
  Westray, and Paplay, in the Mainland of Orkney, are mentioned in the
  Saga. Papa Stour occurs in a deed of A.D. 1229 (Diplom. Norveg. i.
  89), Papill in Unst in a deed of A.D. 1360 (Ibid. iii. 310), and a
  “Sigurdr of Pappley” is mentioned in the agreement between Bishop
  William of Orkney and Hakon Jonson, May 25, 1369 (Ibid. i. 404).

Footnote 10:

  There is a cairn in Sanday called Ivar’s Knowe, which may be his
  burial mound.

Footnote 11:

  Olaf Tryggvason’s Saga, Flateyjarbók, chap. 180, in the Appendix; and
  Ynglinga Saga, Heimskringla, chap. 22. Earl Sigurd’s grave-mound, on
  the estuary of the Oykel (Ekkialsbakki), was known in the 12th century
  as _Siwardhoch_, or Sigurd’s How, and is still identifiable in the
  modern Cyderhall. (See the note on Ekkialsbakki, p. 107 of the Saga.)

Footnote 12:

  Landnamabók, chap. ii.

Footnote 13:

  Laxdæla Saga, chap. iv.

Footnote 14:

  Olaf Tryggvason’s Saga, Flateyjarbók, chap. 180, in Appendix.

Footnote 15:

  This was done by hewing the ribs from the backbone, and tearing out
  the heart and lungs.

Footnote 16:

  Bœndr, the odal landholders. (See note on this word, chap. i. of the
  Saga.)

Footnote 17:

  Olaf Tryggvason’s Saga, Flateyjarbók, chap. 183, in Appendix.

Footnote 18:

  Finnleik has been conjectured to be Finlay, the father of Macbeth.

Footnote 19:

  Olaf Tryggvason’s Saga, Flateyjarbók, chap. 184, in Appendix.

Footnote 20:

  Ibid. chap. 185.

Footnote 21:

  This is probably the Celtic name Maelbrigd. Though it is suggestive of
  Macbeth, the date is too early for Macbeth MacFinlay.

Footnote 22:

  The locality of Skida Myre has been identified by Munch with the Loch
  of Scister, in the parish of Canisbay. It seems rather to be indicated
  by the modern Skitten, as the name formerly applied to the great tract
  of moorland in the north-west corner of the parish of Wick, now
  generally known as the Moss of Kilmster.

Footnote 23:

  Olaf Tryggvason’s Saga, Flateyjarbók, chap. 186, in Appendix.

Footnote 24:

  “He kept Caithness by main force from the Scots.” (See Appendix, p.
  209.)

Footnote 25:

  Njal Saga, chap. lxxxvii.

Footnote 26:

  Njal Saga, _loc. cit._ This Hundi should be the father of the Kali
  Hundason of the subsequent narrative.

Footnote 27:

  Njal Saga, chap. clvi.

Footnote 28:

  War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill, p. 191.

Footnote 29:

  Hrafn the Red, whose denunciation of the raven-banner as the earl’s
  devil may not altogether be accounted for by the fervour of his
  Christianity, was chased into the river, where he was in danger of
  being drowned by the rising tide. In this emergency he made a vow as
  follows:—“Thy dog, Apostle Peter, hath run twice to Rome, and he would
  run the third time if thou gavest him leave.” The Irish Chronicle
  states that the full tide in Dublin Bay on the day of the battle
  coincided with sunrise, and that the returning tide in the evening
  aided in the destruction of the defeated foreigners. The date assigned
  by the Chronicle for the battle is Good Friday, 23d April 1014. It has
  been found by astronomical calculation that the full tide that morning
  did coincide with sunrise—a remarkable attestation of the authenticity
  of the narrative.

Footnote 30:

  See the account of him in the Saga, chap. v. and note.

Footnote 31:

  Rattar Brough, a little to the east of Dunnet Head, seems to be the
  modern form of Rauda Biorg.

Footnote 32:

  See the Saga account, chap. xxiii. and note. The dates do not bear out
  the statement that Thorfinn was Earl for seventy years.

Footnote 33:

  Fordun, v. 24.

Footnote 34:

  Saga Magnus Berfoetts, Heimskringla, chap. xxv.

Footnote 35:

  Chron. Manniæ, Munch’s edition, p. 59.

Footnote 36:

  See the account of his death in the Saga, chap. xxxix. His feast days
  were 16th April and 13th December, the former commemorating his death,
  and the latter the removal of his relics from Birsay by Bishop
  William. (Den Norske Kirkes Historie af R. Keyser: Christiania, 1856,
  p. 162.)

Footnote 37:

  The Earls of Athole seem at this time to have occupied the _rath_ or
  fortress at Logierait. It is mentioned in one of the Scone charters as
  the capital of the earldom in the 12th century. (Lib. Eccles. de Scon,
  p. 35.)

Footnote 38:

  This was the occasion in which he and his men spent the Yule-feast day
  in the Orkahaug, which seems to be Maeshow. See the Saga, chap. xci.

Footnote 39:

  See the notice from the Saga of Egill Skalagrimson, in the chapter on
  Mousa.

Footnote 40:

  Some years after his death Earl Rögnvald was canonised, but his name
  is not commemorated in any of the dedications now remaining in the
  Islands.

Footnote 41:

  Munch, Chron. Manniæ, p. 84.

Footnote 42:

  Fordun’s Annals, xvi.

Footnote 43:

  From this time till 1379 Shetland passed into the immediate possession
  of the crown of Norway. So we find in 1312-1319, that King Hakon
  Magnusson grants to the Mary-Kirk in Oslo (Christiania), for the
  completion of the fabric of the kirk, “all our incomes of Hjaltland
  and the Faroes, so that those who have charge of the kirk’s building
  and fabric every year shall render account thereof to our heirs, and
  when the fabric is altogether completed, then shall the foresaid
  revenues of Hjaltland and the Faroes revert to the crown.”
  (Nicolaysen, Norske Fornlevninger, p. 426.)

Footnote 44:

  Chronica Rogeri de Hoveden (Rolls Ed.), iv. pp, 10, 12.

Footnote 45:

  In the Chronicle of Melrose, under the date 1175, it is stated that
  “Laurentius, Abbot in Orkney, was made Abbot of Melrose.” But as his
  death is recorded in the year 1178, the priest here mentioned by
  Hoveden must have been a different person, though of the same name. At
  the same time, as this passage shows that Earl Harald had a
  hird-priest named Laurentius, it is not improbable that the so-called
  Orkney abbot, who was made abbot of Melrose, may also have been
  Harald’s family or court priest. Being himself the son of a Scottish
  earl, and allied by marriage first with the family of the Earl of
  Fife, and subsequently with the MacHeths, and having, moreover, such
  close relations with the abbey of Scone, it is not unlikely that he
  may have had Scottish priests about his family in preference to those
  of Norwegian extraction.

Footnote 46:

  So says the Saga. Fordun says that the use of his tongue and of one
  eye was in some measure left him. The letter of Pope Innocent,
  addressed to the Bishop of Orkney, prescribing the penance to be
  performed by the man who mutilated the bishop, only mentions the
  cutting out of the tongue. It is as follows:—

  “We have learnt by your letters that Lomberd, a layman, the bearer of
  these presents, accompanied his earl on an expedition into Caithness;
  that there the Earl’s army stormed a castle, killed almost all who
  were in it, and took prisoner the Bishop of Caithness; and that this
  Lomberd, as he says, was compelled by some of the earl’s soldiery to
  cut out the bishop’s tongue. Now because the sin is great and
  grievous, in absolving him, according to the form of the church, we
  have prescribed this penance for satisfaction of his offence, and to
  the terror of others:—That he shall hasten home, and bare-footed, and
  naked, except breeches, and a short woollen vest without sleeves,
  having his tongue tied by a string, and drawn out so as to project
  beyond his lips, and the ends of the string bound round his neck, with
  rods in his hand, in sight of all men, walk for fifteen days
  successively through his own native district, the district of the
  mutilated bishop, and the neighbouring country; he shall go to the
  door of the church without entering, and there, prostrate on the
  earth, undergo discipline with the rods he is to carry; he is thus to
  spend each day in silence and fasting until evening, when he shall
  support nature with bread and water only; after these fifteen days are
  passed he shall prepare within a month to set out for Jerusalem, and
  there labour in the service of the Cross for three years; he shall
  never more bear arms against Christians; for two years he shall fast
  every Friday on bread and water, unless by the indulgence of some
  discreet bishop, or on account of bodily infirmity, this abstinence be
  mitigated. Do you then receive him returning in this manner, and see
  that he observe the penance enjoined him.” (Epist. Innoc. III. Lib.
  iii. No. 77; Diplom. Norvegicum, vii. 3.)

Footnote 47:

  Chron. de Mailros, p. 114; see also p. lxxxi. _infra_.

Footnote 48:

  Magnus, son of the Earl of Angus, appears among those present at the
  perambulation of the boundaries of the lands of the Abbey of
  Aberbrothock on 16th January 1222 (Regist. Vet. de Aberbrothock, p.
  163); but he seems to have been Earl of Angus as well as of Caithness
  at the date after mentioned. A charter of King Alexander II. to the
  chapel of St. Nicholas at Spey, dated 2d October 1232, is witnessed by
  M. Earl of Angus and Kataness (Regist. Moraviense, p. 123).

Footnote 49:

  The title prefixed to the translation of this document by Dean Gule,
  made for William Sinclair of Roslin, in 1554, calls it:—“A Diploma or
  Deduction concerning the Genealogies of the ancient Earls of Orkney,
  drawn up from the most authentic records, by Thomas, Bishop of Orkney,
  with the assistance of his clergy and others, in consequence of an
  order from King Eirik of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, to investigate
  the rights of William Sinclair to the earldom.” But in the document
  itself King Eirik is spoken of as “our former lord of illustrious
  memory,” and the date is evidently erroneous. It is probably to be
  assigned to about 1443. It was first printed by Wallace in 1699, and
  subsequently by Jonæus in the appendix to the Orkneyinga Saga in 1780;
  by Barry in his History of the Orkneys in 1805; in the Bannatyne
  Miscellany, 1848; and by Munch in his Symbolæ, Christiania, 1850.

Footnote 50:

  Among the documents found in the King’s Treasury at Edinburgh in 1282,
  were the letters addressed by the King of Norway (presumably Hakon) to
  the inhabitants of Caithness. The inhabitants of Caithness seem to
  have been also obliged by the Scottish King to give hostages for their
  fealty to him. In the accounts of Laurence Grant, Sheriff of
  Inverness, for the year 1263, there is a charge of £15:6:3 for the
  expenses of twenty-one hostages from Caithness, at the rate of one
  denarius (penny) for each per day for twenty-five weeks, “and then
  they were set at liberty.” (Compota Camerarium Scotiæ, i. p. 31.)

Footnote 51:

  Acta Parl. Scot., vol. i. p. 82.

Footnote 52:

  Iceland Annals, _sub anno_.

Footnote 53:

  The Scala Cronica says off the coast of Buchan. “One Master Weland, a
  clerke of Scotlande, sent yn to Norway for Margaret, dyed with her by
  tempeste on the se cumming oute of Norway to Scotland yn costes of
  Boghan.” (Scala Cronica, Mait. Club, pp. 110, 282.) Wyntoun says she
  was “put to dede by martyry,” and assigns as the reason that the
  Norwegians would not have one who was of another nation and a female
  to be heir to the throne of Norway, though their laws allowed it. He
  had probably heard the story of the “false Margaret.” (See p. lii.)

Footnote 54:

  In the Wardrobe Rolls of King Edward I. (1290) the following payments
  occur:—“Sept. 1.—To Lord Eli de Hamville going by the king’s orders
  with the Lord Bishop of Durham towards Scotland to meet the messengers
  of the King of Norway and the princess, and was to return with the
  news to the king. To John Tyndale, the messenger from the Bishop of
  St. Andrews, who brought letters from his master to the king
  concerning the rumours of the arrival of the Princess of Scotland in
  Orkney—by gift of the king, xxsh. To William Playfair, messenger of
  the Earl of Orkney, who brought letters to our Lord the King, on the
  part of Lord John Comyn, concerning the reported arrival of the
  Scottish Princess in Orkney—by gift of the king, xiiish. 4d.” There is
  also a detailed account of the expenses of two messengers who left
  Newcastle on the 15th September, were at Haberdene on the 23d, at the
  Meikle Ferry in Sutherland on the 30th, where they met the messengers
  from Scotland, then proceeded by Helmsdale and Spittal to Wick, which
  they reached on the 4th October. They left Wick on the 6th October,
  and arrived at Norham on the 21st November. On the 13th May of the
  following year (1291) Earl John of Orkney had a safe conduct to come
  to King Edward till the 24th June, when the earl would doubtless
  communicate to the king all that he knew of the princess’s death.

Footnote 55:

  This letter was dated 1st February 1320, and the substance of it is
  given by Suhm, vol. xii. p. 29. It does not seem to be known from the
  original document however, but from a later “paraphrase,” as Munch
  calls it, preserved in the Royal Library at Stockholm. (Det Norske
  Folks Historie, vol. iv. part 2, p. 348.)

Footnote 56:

  Under the date 1293 the following entry occurs in the Chronicle of
  Lanercost:—“Dominica etiam post festum Sancti Martini (Nov. 15)
  desponsata est filia Roberti de Carrick regi Norwagiae Magno.” (Chron.
  de Lanercost, p. 155.) Magnus is plainly a mistake for Eirik, the son
  of Magnus, who reigned from 1280 to 1299.

Footnote 57:

  Rymer’s Fœdera, Syllabus I. p. 114.

Footnote 58:

  Det Norske Folks Historie, vol. iv. part 2, p. 202.

Footnote 59:

  Munch, Det Norske Folks Historie, vol. iv. part 2, pp. 195, 344.

Footnote 60:

  Haflidi Steinson died nearly nineteen years after this as priest of
  Breidabolstad in Iceland. The Iceland Annals, recording his death in
  1319, recount the story as if this were the real Margaret (whose death
  they record in 1290), and add that “to this Haflidi himself bore
  witness when he heard that this same Margaret had been burnt at
  Nordness.” (See Wyntoun’s Statement, p. 1, note 1.)

Footnote 61:

  On the 2d April 1320 Bishop Audfinn writes to the Archbishop that on
  the 1st February he had issued a prohibition against the bad custom of
  making pilgrimages to Nordness, and offering invocations to the woman
  who had been burnt many years ago for giving herself out as King
  Eirik’s daughter. He also complains to the archbishop that opposition
  had been offered to the reading out of the prohibition in the Church
  of the Apostles of Bergen. (Munch, Det Norske Folks Historie, iv. part
  2, p. 348.)

Footnote 62:

  This noble document was signed by eight earls and thirty-one barons of
  Scotland, at the abbey of Aberbrothock on the 6th April 1320. After
  asserting the legitimate claims of King Robert the Bruce, and
  narrating his struggles in the cause of Scottish independence, it goes
  on to say that “If he were to desist from what he has begun, wishing
  to subject us or our kingdom to the King of England or the English, we
  would immediately endeavour to expel him as our enemy, and the
  subverter of his own rights and ours, and make another king who should
  be able to defend us. For so long as a hundred remain alive, we never
  will in any degree be subject to the dominion of the English. Since
  not for glory, riches, nor honour, we fight, but for liberty alone,
  which no good man loses but with his life.” The duplicate, preserved
  in the General Register House, is printed in facsimile in the National
  Manuscripts of Scotland, published under the superintendence of the
  Lord Clerk Register.

Footnote 63:

  The lands are those of Stufum, Kuikobba, Klaet, Thordar, Borgh, Leika,
  Lidh, Haughs-æth and Petland-Sker. (Diplom. Norvegicum, ii. 146.)

Footnote 64:

  Munch, in his Genealogical Table of the Earls of Orkney, makes
  Katharina to be the daughter of Earl John (following Douglas’ Peerage
  of Scotland), and Magnus to be a son of Malcolm of Caithness, whom he
  conjectures to have been a son of the first Magnus. But in a note on
  this subject in the second series of his History, he acknowledges the
  mistake, referring to this document in proof of Magnus’ descent from
  Earl John. (Det Norske Folks Historie, Anden Afdeling, vol. i. p.
  317.)

Footnote 65:

  An entry in the Chamberlain Rolls for that year mentions the dues of
  the fourth part of Caithness, which the Earl of Stratherne had. (Comp.
  Camer. Scot. i. p. 235.)

Footnote 66:

  This document is not now to be found, but Mr. Cosmo Innes says (Lib.
  Insule Missarum, p. xliii) that he made a note of its purport as given
  above in the Dunrobin charter-room. Sir Robert Gordon, in his
  Genealogy of the Earls of Sutherland (p. 49), gives the purport of the
  document in precisely similar terms, but says that it is dated 28th
  May 1344. Sir James Balfour, in his Catalogue of the Scottish
  Nobility, also gives 1344. The confirmation of this contract by David
  II. is recorded as a “confirmation of a contract of marriage betwixt
  Malisius, Earl of Stratherne, Caithness, and Orkney, and William, Earl
  of Ross.” (Robertson’s Index of Missing Charters, p. 51.)

Footnote 67:

  There is also on record a confirmation by Robert I. of a charter of
  the lands of Kingkell, Brechin, to Maria (Marjorie?) de Stratherne,
  spouse of Malise of Stratherne. (Robertson’s Index, p. 19.)

Footnote 68:

  Chronicle of the Earls of Ross, Mis. Scot., vol. iv. p. 128.

Footnote 69:

  There is an entry in the Chamberlain Rolls, in 1340, in regard to a
  payment by Johannes More, “pro terris de Beridale in Cattania, de
  quibus dicit se hereditarium infeodari per comitem de Strathern et per
  Regem confirmari.” (Comp. Camerar. Scot. i. p. 265.)

Footnote 70:

  Sir James Balfour (Catalogue of the Scottish Nobility) says:—“This
  Earl Malisius was forfaulted by King David II. for alienating the
  earldom of Stratherne to the Earl of Warrenne, an Englishman, the
  king’s enemy, and all his possessions annexed to the crown.” Sir
  Robert Gordon says that the charter by King David granting the earldom
  of Stratherne to Maurice Moray is dated the last day of October 1345.

Footnote 71:

  A dispensation granted by Pope Benedict XII. in July 1339 for the
  marriage of Maurice de Moravia with Johanna, widow of John, Earl of
  Athole, styles her Countess of Stratherne. (Theiner’s Monumenta, p.
  275.) Maurice fell at the battle of Durham in 1346. Johanna, Countess
  of Stratherne, in her widowhood executed a charter in favour of Robert
  of Erskine and his wife, Christian of Keith, her cousin, which is
  confirmed by Robert, Steward of Scotland and Earl of Stratherne in
  1361. (Chartulary of Cambuskenneth, Grampian Club, p. 255.)

Footnote 72:

  Third Report of Com. on Hist. MSS. p. 416.

Footnote 73:

  Rymer’s Fœdera, Syllabus i. p. 272.

Footnote 74:

  Robertson’s Index of Charters, pp. 18, 34.

Footnote 75:

  Hist. Doc. Scot. i. p. 394.

Footnote 76:

  Balnagown Charters, Orig. Paroch. ii. 487.

Footnote 77:

  Robert Stewart, Seneschal of Scotland and Earl of Stratherne,
  certifies that, in his court held at Crieff, 8th May 1358, he had seen
  read and confirmed the charters granted to the abbot and convent of
  Inchaffray of the annual of 42 marcs of the thanage of Dunyne, given
  by the former earls of good memory—Malise the first and Malise the
  second, his predecessors. (Liber Insula Missarum, p. 55.) Et nihil hic
  de terris quondam Malesii infra comitatu Cathanie quia comes de Ross
  se intromittit de eisdem. (Conqu. Camerar. Scot., _an._ 1357, i. p.
  320.) That the second Malise of Robert Stewart’s deed is the last
  Malise who was Earl of Stratherne seems to be shown by another deed of
  Robert Stewart, dated in 1361, in which, as Seneschal of Scotland and
  Earl of Stratherne, he grants to James Douglas the lands of Kellor in
  Stratherne, “which the late Malise gave.” In the confirmation of this
  grant by Eufamia, Countess of Moray and Stratherne, he is styled “the
  late Malise of good memory.” (Regist. Honoris de Morton, ii. pp. 60,
  86.)

Footnote 78:

  See p. lvi.

Footnote 79:

  Called in the Diploma “Here Ginsill de Swethrik,” for “Erengisle de
  Suecia.” He was lawman of Tisherad in Sweden in 1337.

Footnote 80:

  In the Diploma he is called “quodam Gothredo, nomine Gothormo le
  Spere”—_Gothredo_ being a misreading for _Gothricio_, “a native of
  Gothland.” (Munch, Symbolæ, p. 55.)

Footnote 81:

  Munch, Norske Folks Historie, 2d series, i. p. 595.

Footnote 82:

  In 1360 he grants certain lands to the monastery of Calmar for the
  souls of his deceased wives, Meretta and Annot or Agneta, the latter
  being probably Malise’s daughter, as the name is not a common one in
  Sweden.

Footnote 83:

  He styles himself “Comes Orchadensis” in a deed of 4th March 1388.
  (Diplom. Norvegicum, v. 246.)

Footnote 84:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, ii. 337-339.

Footnote 85:

  See the document dated at Cullen, 4th August 1321, quoted on p. lv,
  _supra_.

Footnote 86:

  In a deed executed at Kirkwall, 20th January 1364, by which Bernard de
  Rowle resigns to Hugh de Ross (brother of William, Earl of Ross) the
  whole lands of Fouleroule in Aberdeenshire, the witnesses are John de
  Gamery and Symon de Othyrles, canons of Caithness; Euphemia de
  Stratherne, one of the heirs of the late Malise, Earl of Caithness;
  Thomas de St. Clair, “ballivus regis Norvagie;” and Alexander St.
  Clair. (Regist. Aberdonense, i. 106.)

Footnote 87:

  Sir James Balfour calls her Lucia. She is also called Lucia by William
  Drummond, author of the “Genealogie of the House of Drummond, 1681,”
  but in neither case is any documentary authority cited. Camden says
  the eldest daughter.

Footnote 88:

  Barbour’s Bruce (Spald. Club), p. 482.

Footnote 89:

  Munch’s Norske Folks Historie, 2d series, vol. ii. p. 96. See also the
  deed of investiture, which is printed at length in the Diplomatarium
  Norvegicum, vol. ii. pp. 353-358.

Footnote 90:

  Balfour, Oppressions of Orkney (Maitland Club), p. xxvi. Such was not
  the opinion of Father Hay, the panegyrist of the St. Clairs of Roslyn.
  He says that “Henry, prince of Orknay, was more honoured than any of
  his ancestres, for he had power to cause stamp coine within his
  dominions, to make laws, to remitt crimes;—he had his sword of honour
  carried before him wheresoever he went; he had a crowne in his armes,
  bore a crowne on his head when he constituted laws; and, in a word,
  was subject to none, save only he held his lands of the King of
  Danemark, Sweden, and Noraway, and entred with them, to whom also it
  did belong to crowne any of those three kings, so that in all those
  parts he was esteemed a second person to the king.” (Genealogie of the
  St. Clairs, p. 17.) Father Hay’s romances receive no countenance
  whatever from the deed of investiture.

Footnote 91:

  About £333 sterling.

Footnote 92:

  Father Hay states (Genealogie of the St. Clairs, p. 17) that Henry St.
  Clair “married Elisabeth Sparres, daughter of Malesius Sparres, Prince
  of Orkney, Earl of Caithness and Stratherne, through which marriage he
  became Prince of Orkney.” But Malise Sperra never had any connection
  with the earldoms of Caithness or Stratherne. In another place, p. 33,
  he says that Sir William Sinclair (who fell fighting with the Saracens
  in Spain in 1330) “was married to Elizabeth Sparre, daughter to the
  Earle of Orkney, and so by her became the first Earl of Orkney of the
  Saintclairs. His name was Julius Sparre. He is also reputed Earl of
  Stratherne and Caithness.” But this is manifestly a tissue of
  impossibilities. He seems to have copied the last statement from the
  Drummond MS. (1681), where the additional statement is made that
  Elizabeth’s mother was Lucia, daughter of the Earl of Ross.
  (Genealogie of the House of Drummond: Edinburgh, 1831, p. 237.) Both
  writers seem to have confounded Malise, Earl of Stratherne, with his
  daughter’s son, Malise Sperra.

Footnote 93:

  Iceland Annals, _sub anno_. Munch, Det Norske Folks Historie, 2d
  series, vol. ii. p. 106.

Footnote 94:

  He seems to have held lands in Banffshire. In the Chamberlain Rolls,
  1438, there is an entry of a receipt of £9 from James M’fersane for
  the land formerly belonging to Malis Speir, knight in the Sheriffdom
  of Banff, remaining in the king’s hands. (Diplom. Norvegicum, i. 366.)

Footnote 95:

  The Iceland Annals, under the date 1389, have the following
  entry:—“Malise Sperra slain in Hjaltland, with seven others, by the
  Earl of Orkney. He had previously been taken captive by him. From that
  conflict there escaped a man-servant who with six men in a six-oared
  boat got away safely to Norway.”

Footnote 96:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, ii. 401. Regist. Mag. Sigill. 196.

Footnote 97:

  This deed is said by Robert Riddell to be in the Perth Charter-chest.
  A copy of it is in one of his MS. note-books in the Advocates’
  Library. See also Robertson’s Index of Charters, p. 128. The “double”
  of this deed is said by William Drummond (1681) to have been given to
  him by a friend, and the substance of it is given by him as
  follows:—“Sir John Drummond and his lady Elisabeth Sinclair oblige
  themselves to a noble and potent Lord, Henry, Earle of Orkney, Lord
  Roslin, their father, that they nor their aires shall never claime any
  interest or right of propertie to any lands or possessions belonging
  to the said earle or his aires lying within the kingdome of Norroway,
  so long as he or any air-male of his shall be on lyfe to inherit the
  same; bot if it happen (which God forbid) the said earle to die
  without any air-male to succeed to him, then it shall be lawful for
  them to claim such a portion of the aforesaid lands as is known by the
  Norwegian laws to appertain to a sister of the family. Sealled at
  Rosline 13th May 1396.” (Genealogie of the House of Drummond, p. 91.)

Footnote 98:

  Henry himself had married a daughter of Malise. See p. lxiii.

Footnote 99:

  Father Hay says that he escaped through the instrumentality of one
  John Robinsone, indweller at Pentland, one of his tenants, who went to
  the place where his master was confined and played the fool so
  cunningly that he was allowed access to the prison, and so found means
  to convey the earl out in disguise. (Genealogie of the St. Clairs, p.
  81.)

Footnote 100:

  Balfour’s Annals, i. 148.

Footnote 101:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, ii. 482.

Footnote 102:

  Fordun, Scotichron. xv. chap. 32.

Footnote 103:

  Douglas’ Peerage. The Diploma says nothing of his wife, but he is said
  to have married Egidia Douglas, daughter of Lord William Douglas, and
  Egidia, daughter of Robert II. (Extracta ex Cronicis Scocie, p. 200.)

Footnote 104:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, ii. 489. This document is endorsed—“Biscop Thomes
  breff af Orknoy, at han skal halde Orknoy til myn herres konnungens
  hand, oc hans effterkommende, oc lade him with Noren lagh.”

Footnote 105:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, ii. 498. This document is endorsed—“Item biscop
  Thomes aff Orknoy bref um Kirkwaw slot i Orknoy, oc um landet oc
  greveschapet ther samestads.”

Footnote 106:

  This document is printed at length in Torfæus, pp. 179-182; in
  Balfour’s Oppressions of Orkney (Maitland Club), pp. 105-110; and also
  in the Norse language of the time in the Diplomatarium Norvegicum, ii.
  514.

Footnote 107:

  Torfæus, Hist. Orc. 182. The document of which Torfæus here gives a
  copy, however, is that of the 31st year of the reign of King Eirik
  (1420), previously noticed, and refers not to the bishop’s second
  appointment but to his first.

Footnote 108:

  Torfæus, p. 183.

Footnote 109:

  Balfour’s Annals, i. 155.

Footnote 110:

  Diplom. Norveg. vii. 430.

Footnote 111:

  He had received a grant of the earldom of Caithness from King James
  II. 28th August 1455, as formerly mentioned, p. lxi.

Footnote 112:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, v. 599.

Footnote 113:

  Ibid. v. 605.

Footnote 114:

  These islands had been ceded by Norway to Scotland in 1266 on
  condition of an annual payment of 100 marks, which at this time had
  fallen into arrear for 26 years.

Footnote 115:

  His words imply that it was by request of the Orkneymen themselves
  that Adalbert sent them preachers “extremi venerant Islani, Gronlani,
  et Orchadum legati petentes ut prædicatores illuc dirigeret, quod et
  fecit.”

Footnote 116:

  Keyser, Den Norske Kirkes Historie, i. 158; Torfæus, i. 160; Munch,
  Det Norske Folks Historie, ii. p. 216; Grub’s Eccles. Hist. i. 252.

Footnote 117:

  Twysden, Decem Scriptores, pp. 1709-13.

Footnote 118:

  Printed in the Notes and Illustrations to the Scala Cronica (Maitland
  Club), p. 234.

Footnote 119:

  Monasticon Anglicanum, vi. p. 1186.

Footnote 120:

  Flor. Wig. Chron. Monum. Hist. Britann. p. 644.

Footnote 121:

  The name Christ’s Church, says Munch, was only given to a cathedral
  church.

Footnote 122:

  Sir Henry Dryden’s Notices of Ancient Churches in Orkney, in the
  _Orcadian_, 1867.

Footnote 123:

  Munch’s Catalogue of the Bishops of Orkney, Bannatyne Miscellany, iii.
  181.

Footnote 124:

  See the Saga, p. 126.

Footnote 125:

  Fornmanna Sögur, vol. vi.

Footnote 126:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, vii. p. 2.

Footnote 127:

  See p. lxxx.

Footnote 128:

  Hakonar Saga hins gamla, Flateyjarbók, iii. 52.

Footnote 129:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, vii. p. 13.

Footnote 130:

  Ibid. i. 32.

Footnote 131:

  Keyser, Den Norske Kirkes Historie, ii. 210. Torfæus Hist. Orc., p.
  172.

Footnote 132:

  Diplom. Norvegicum. The Chron. de Lanercost, under the date 1275,
  incidentally notices a Bishop of Orkney, named William, who related
  many wonderful things of the islands under Norwegian rule, and
  specially of Iceland. Munch supposes him to have been one of the
  titular bishops consecrated at York, and suggests that he may have
  been the author of the curious fragment of a Chronicon Norvegiæ
  preserved in the Panmure transcript, along with the transcript of the
  Diploma of the succession of the Earls of Orkney, printed at
  Christiania, 1850. (Munch, Symbolæ, pp. 2, 18; Det Norske Folks
  Historie, iv. part 1, p. 678; Chron. de Lanercost, p. 97.)

Footnote 133:

  Keyser, Den Norske Kirkes Historie, ii. 216.

Footnote 134:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, vii. p. 134.

Footnote 135:

  Ibid. p. 134.

Footnote 136:

  Printed from the Panmure transcript in the Miscellany of the Spalding
  Club, vol. v. p. 257.

Footnote 137:

  Theiner, Vetera Monumenta, p. 376.

Footnote 138:

  Among the persons mentioned in this record are Sir Richard of Rollisey
  (Rousay), Sir Christen of Sanday, John of Orkney, Sigurd of Pappley,
  John of Dunray (Downreay in Caithness). The title “sir” is equivalent
  to our “reverend.” (Diplom. Norvegicum, i. 308.)

Footnote 139:

  See p. lxix. Both these documents are printed at length in the second
  volume of the Diplomatarium Norvegicum, and are exceedingly curious
  specimens of the language of the time.

Footnote 140:

  Diplom. Norveg. v. 605.

Footnote 141:

  There was a monastery at Dornoch before the death of Earl Rögnvald in
  1158. King David of Scotland addressed a missive to Rögnvald, Earl of
  Orkney, and to the Earl of Caithness (Harald Maddadson), and to all
  good men in Caithness and Orkney, requesting them to protect the monks
  living at Durnach in Caithness, their servants and their effects, and
  to see that they sustained no loss or injury. (Regist. de Dunfermelyn,
  p. 14.)

Footnote 142:

  Regist. de Dunfermelyn, p. 14.

Footnote 143:

  Ibid. p. 74.

Footnote 144:

  Diplom. Norveg. vii. p. 2.

Footnote 145:

  The Book of Deer (Spald. Club), p. 95.

Footnote 146:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, vii. p. 2.

Footnote 147:

  See p. xliii, and also the account of these transactions in the Saga,
  chap. cxv.

Footnote 148:

  Printed in Theiner’s Vetera Monumenta, p. 21.

Footnote 149:

  Chron. de Mailros, pp. 139, 150.

Footnote 150:

  Printed in the Miscellany of the Bannatyne Club, vol. iii.

Footnote 151:

  The bones of St. Fergus, the patron saint of Caithness, were deposited
  in the abbey of Scone. Harald Maddadson, Earl of Orkney and Caithness,
  granted a mark of silver yearly to the canons of Scone for the souls
  of himself and wife, and the souls of his predecessors. The grant is
  witnessed by his son “Turphin.” The Abbot of Scone obtained a royal
  precept from King Alexander II. addressed to the sheriffs and bailies
  of Moray and Caithness, for the protection of the ship of the convent
  when on its voyages within their jurisdiction. The Abbey of Scone was
  proprietor of the church of Kildonan, which, with its chapels and
  lands, was confirmed to the canons of Scone by Pope Honorius III. in
  1226. (Liber Ecclesie de Scon, pp. 37, 45, and 67.)

Footnote 152:

  Sir Robert Gordon mentions a tradition that he was the builder of the
  noble castle of Kildrummy, in Mar.

Footnote 153:

  Theiner, Vet. Mon. Hib. et Scot. p. 89.

Footnote 154:

  Ibid. p. 104.

Footnote 155:

  There was collected in the year 1274—From Olric (Olrig), 2 marcs;
  Dinnosc (Dunnet), 32s. 4d.; Cranesby (Canisbay), 40s.; Ascend
  (Skinnet), 5s. 4d.; Haukyrc (Halkirk), 14s. 2d.; Turishau (Thurso),
  26s. 7d.; the chapel of Haludal (Halladale), 9s. 4d.; Lagheryn
  (Latheron), 27s. 10d.; Durness, 14s. 8d. There was collected in the
  year 1275—Laterne (Latheron), 32s.; Cananby, 32s.; Thorsau, 2 marcs;
  the chapel of Helwedale (Halladale), 9s. 4d.; Ra (Reay), 9s. 4d.;
  Haukyrc (Halkirk), 13s. 9d.; Olric (Olrig), 2 marcs; the church of
  Scynand (Skinnet), 18s. 8d.; the church of Dunost (Dunnet), 2 marcs;
  Keldoninave (Kildonan), 2 marcs. The personal contributions include
  one from Magister H. de Notingham—doubtless the Notingham near Forse
  which still bears the name unchanged. (Theiner, Vet. Monum. pp. 112,
  115.)

Footnote 156:

  Theiner, Vet. Monum. p. 124.

Footnote 157:

  Henry of Nothingham was a canon of Caithness in 1272. (Lib. Eccles. de
  Scon, p. 85.)

Footnote 158:

  Rotuli Scotiæ, vol. i. p. 6.

Footnote 159:

  Ibid. vol. i. p. 7.

Footnote 160:

  Theiner, Vet. Monum, p. 161.

Footnote 161:

  Ibid.

Footnote 162:

  Ibid. p. 163.

Footnote 163:

  Ibid.

Footnote 164:

  Comp. Camerar. Scot. i. 25-26.

Footnote 165:

  See a paper by Joseph Robertson, Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scot. vol. ii. p.
  31, _note_.

Footnote 166:

  Theiner, Vet. Monum., p. 276.

Footnote 167:

  Ibid.

Footnote 168:

  Ibid. p. 277.

Footnote 169:

  Origines Parochiales, ii. 485.

Footnote 170:

  Regist. Morav. p. 368.

Footnote 171:

  There is a writ of Pope Innocent VI., dated in May 1360, preferring
  Thomas to be bishop of the “Ecclesia Cathayensis,” and ordering him to
  repair to his diocese on being consecrated by the Bishop of Preneste.
  It appears from subsequent documents, however, that he was obstructed
  and interfered with by the bishops of Limerick, Ardfert, and
  Clonmacnoise, who laid many charges of criminal and illegal
  proceedings against him, asserting that the “Ecclesia Cathayensis” was
  a parochial and not a cathedral church, and the Pope appointed George,
  Archbishop of Cashel, to report on the matter. Owing to the death of
  the archbishop the report was not made, and the remit was renewed by
  the successor of Pope Innocent VI. to the Bishop of Lismore. It is not
  clear whether this was a preferment to the see of Caithness following
  on the death of Thomas de Fingask, or a series of mistakes. See
  Theiner’s Vetera Monumenta, pp. 316, 318, 324.

Footnote 172:

  Theiner, Vetera Monumenta, p. 333.

Footnote 173:

  Diplom. Norvegicum, vii. p. 309.

Footnote 174:

  Regist. Morav. p. 200.

Footnote 175:

  Regist. Episc. Brechinensis, p. 39.

Footnote 176:

  For the details of the structure by Sir H. Dryden, see the
  Transactions of the Architectural Institute of Scotland, 1869-73. See
  also Billings’ Baronial and Ecclesiastical Antiquities, 1848; and
  Worsaae’s Danes and Northmen, 1852.

Footnote 177:

  Sir Henry Dryden recognises the following styles in the building:—1st
  style, 1137 to 1160; 2d style, 1160 to 1200; 3d style, 1200 to 1250;
  4th style, 1250 to 1350; 5th style, 1450 to 1500. (Guide to St.
  Magnus’ Cathedral by Sir H. Dryden, Daventry, 1871.)

Footnote 178:

  Magnus Helga Saga (edidit Jonæus: Hafniæ, 1780), pp. 536, 538.

Footnote 179:

  The present church of St. Olaf’s, which is not older than the 16th
  century, and is said by Wallace to have been built by Bishop Reid, in
  all probability stands on the site of the older one. The veneration of
  St. Olaf extended both to Scotland and England. There was a church
  dedicated to him at Cruden, and among the articles enumerated in an
  inventory of the treasury of the cathedral of Aberdeen in 1518, there
  is “a small image of St. Olaf of silver decorated with precious
  stones.”—(Regist. Episc. Aberdonense, ii. p. 172.)

Footnote 180:

  Neale, in his Ecclesiological Notes (p. 116), states that Earl
  Rögnvald’s remains were first interred in the church of Burwick, South
  Ronaldsay, but gives no authority for the statement. The Saga, on the
  other hand, states expressly that his remains were taken to Kirkwall,
  and interred in the cathedral. It is not likely that the founder of
  the cathedral would have been interred anywhere else.

Footnote 181:

  See p. liii, _antea_.

Footnote 182:

  In the engraving given of this church by Hibbert, the church and tower
  are both represented as covered by a stone roof, that of the tower
  being a conical cap resembling the usual termination of the Irish
  Round Towers.

Footnote 183:

  In Jo. Ben’s description of the islands (1529) it is said that the
  church of Egilsey was dedicated to St. Magnus. But as he adds that St.
  Magnus was born in Egilsey, and brought up there from his infancy, and
  that he gave a piece of ground to his nurse, on which she made an
  underground house with all its furniture of stone, it is plain that he
  is merely repeating the absurd traditions of the time.

Footnote 184:

  There were three towered churches in Shetland (see p. ci.)

Footnote 185:

  “Its style of architecture,” says Sir Henry Dryden, “discarding
  certain indications of an earlier date, prevents our assigning to it a
  date later than the beginning of the 12th century. When we contrast it
  with the Kirkwall Cathedral begun in 1137, we are forced to give an
  earlier date than that to Egilsey, and this opinion is corroborated by
  the churches at Orphir and Brough of Birsay.”—(Ruined Churches in
  Orkney and Shetland, in the _Orcadian_ of 1867.)

Footnote 186:

  Those in Britain are Cambridge, consecrated in 1101; Northampton,
  about 1115; Maplestead, 1118; the Temple Church, London, 1185; the
  small Norman church in Ludlow Castle, and the Earls’ Church at Orphir
  in Orkney—the only example in Scotland. “The round churches at
  Cambridge, Northampton, and London,” says Ferguson, “were certainly
  sepulchral, or erected in imitation of the church at Jerusalem”
  (History of Architecture, ii. p. 60). Wilson, on the other hand,
  supposes that the early dry-built beehive houses of the Western
  Islands may have served as a model for some of the earliest Christian
  oratories, of which that at Orphir, he remarks, is an interesting
  example (Prehistoric Annals, ii. p. 369). But there is no analogy
  whatever between the architectural features of Orphir and those of the
  beehive houses, nor has it any resemblance to the earlier oratories
  and chapels of the Western Isles.

Footnote 187:

  Pope’s Translation of Torfæus (Wick, 1866), p. 108.

Footnote 188:

  Sir H. Dryden says this mode of putting on the arch was probably
  resorted to in order to give a support to the centre on which the arch
  was built. This seems highly probable, and in some cases it would seem
  as if the original supports still remain in the shape of two long thin
  slabs resting on the imposts on either side and meeting in the centre
  of the arch. See the engraving of the doorway in St. Mary’s Church,
  Kilbar, Barra, in Mr. Muir’s Characteristics of Old Church
  Architecture, p. 230.

Footnote 189:

  Caithness and Part of Orkney, an Ecclesiological Sketch, by T. S.
  Muir, p. 25.

Footnote 190:

  From an expression of Jo. Ben’s it would seem to have been dedicated
  to St. Peter:—“Weir, insula est parva, Petro Apostolo dicata.”

Footnote 191:

  This church, which was called St. Peter’s in 1726, is called St.
  Mary’s by Mr. Muir.

Footnote 192:

  Sir Henry Dryden remarks that the same mode of making doorways is to
  be seen in the chapels at Lybster in Caithness, at Weir, at Linton in
  Shapinsay, Uyea in Shetland, and in some of the early oratories in
  Ireland, and suggests the question—Were there doors in these churches,
  and if so, where were they placed and how were they hung? “It is
  known,” he adds, “that in many cottages in old time the door was an
  animal’s hide hung across the opening, and probably this may have been
  the case in these unrebated church entrances.” The custom of closing
  the entrances to the places of worship by a skin or heavy curtain
  survives in the East to the present day. The “veil of the Temple,”
  covering the entrance to the Holy of Holies, is a familiar
  illustration of this ancient custom among the Jews.

Footnote 193:

  The minister of Birsay in 1627 says:—“There is likewise ane litill
  holm within the sea callit the Brughe of Birsay, quhilk is thocht be
  the elder sort to have belongit to the reid friaris, for there is the
  foundation of ane kirk and kirkyard there as yet to be
  seen.”—Peterkin’s Rentals, No. III., p. 98.

Footnote 194:

  Low’s Tour through Orkney and Zetland, MS. in the possession of David
  Laing, Esq.

Footnote 195:

  See the article on “The Twin-towered Churches of Denmark,” by J.
  Kornerup, in the Aarboger for Nordisk Oldkindighed for 1869, p. 13.

Footnote 196:

  Detailed accounts of the excavation, with translations and facsimiles
  of the inscriptions of Maeshow, have been given in a privately-printed
  work by Mr. Farrer, and in a work published by the late Mr. John
  Mitchell. An account of the structure of Maeshow, with notices of the
  inscriptions, is given by Dr. John Stuart, secretary to the Society of
  Antiquaries of Scotland, in their Proceedings, vol. v. p. 247. A
  notice, with readings of the inscriptions, by Dr. Charlton, is given
  in Archæologia Æliana, vol. vi. p. 127 (1865). See also the splendid
  work on The Runic Monuments of Scandinavia and England, by Professor
  George Stephens, Copenhagen, 1866-68.

Footnote 197:

  Hogboy is the Norse word _Haug-bui_, the tenant of the _haug_, how, or
  tomb—a hoy-laid dead man, or the goblin that guards the treasures
  buried in the how. (Ordbog det Norske Gamle Sprog, _sub voce_.)

Footnote 198:

  The leading specific feature of the Orkney group of chambered cairns
  is the formation of small cells or loculi off the principal chamber.
  The Caithness group is distinguished by the tricameration of the
  chamber, and the Clava group by having a circular or oval chamber
  undivided and unfurnished with _loculi_.

Footnote 199:

  See Chap. xci.

Footnote 200:

  The first par of the word seems analogous to the last part of our own
  Carling-wark, indicating astonishment at the amount of labour required
  for the rearing of such a structure.

Footnote 201:

  In his recent work on Rude Stone Monuments of all Countries (London:
  John Murray, 1872), Mr. Ferguson suggests that Maeshow may have been
  erected for Earl Havard, who fell at Stennis about A.D. 970. But apart
  from its Celtic structural character, if it had been Earl Havard’s
  tomb his countrymen could scarcely have so completely forgotten the
  fact in the short space of 200 years.

Footnote 202:

  The most detailed account of these is to be found in an elaborate
  paper on the Celtic Antiquities of Orkney, by Captain F. W. L. Thomas,
  R.N., in the Archæologia, vol. xxxiv.

Footnote 203:

  Flateyjarbók (Christiania, 1860-68), vol. i. p. 225. See the
  translation in the Appendix, p. 208.

Footnote 204:

  The following enumeration of the known sites of the “Pictish Towers,”
  Borgs, or Brochs, will give some idea of their number and
  distribution. In Shetland there are, in the island of Unst, 7; in
  Whalsay, 3; in Yell, 9; in Fetlar, 4; in Mainland and its outlying
  islets, 51; in Foula, 1—total, 75. In Orkney, in the island of North
  Ronaldsay, 2; in Papa Westray, 2; in Westray, 5; in Sanday, 9; in
  Eday, 1; in Stronsay, 3; in Shapinsay, 1; in Gairsay, 1; in Rousay, 3;
  in Mainland, 35; in South Ronaldsay, 4; in Hoy, 1; in Hunday, 1; in
  Burray, 2—total, 70. In Caithness, 79. In Sutherland, 60. In Lewis and
  Harris, 38. In Skye, 30. (For detailed descriptions of Mousa, and many
  others of these Towers, and lists of their sites, so far as known, see
  the Archæologia Scotica, “Transactions of the Scottish Society of
  Antiquaries,” vol. v.)

Footnote 205:

  Detailed accounts of these are printed in the Proceedings and
  Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland.

Footnote 206:

  No instance of a flint arrow-point, a flint celt, a polished stone
  axe, or perforated stone hammer, has yet been found in a Broch or
  “Pictish Tower.”

Footnote 207:

  As the people of the islands did universally to a comparatively recent
  period, and as in some of the islands they do to this day.

Footnote 208:

  See the Saga, p. 161.

Footnote 209:

  _Scat_ still remains _the_ Orkney grievance. “Scalds” were got rid of
  in the 17th century, having been then solemnly abolished by the
  kirk-session of Kirkwall, on pain of 40s. penalty and four hours in
  the cuckstool, as slanderers and persons offensive to their
  neighbours.

Footnote 210:

  Fasti Eccles. Scot. v. p. 441. This statement must be taken _cum grano
  salis_. There can be no doubt, however, that the old language was in
  use in Shetland at that date. The latest known document in the Norse
  language, written in Shetland, is dated 1586, and among those
  mentioned in it is “Mons Norsko minister i Jella”—Magnus Norsk,
  minister in Yell. (Mem. de Soc. Antiq. du Nord, 1850-60, p. 96.)

Footnote 211:

  See Lyngbye’s Faeroiske Qvæder, with Muller’s Introduction: Randers,
  1822. The old man, William Henry, of Guttorm, in Foula, from whom Low
  took down the Shetland ballad, spoke to him of “three kinds of poetry
  used in Norn and recited or sung by the old men—viz., the Ballad, the
  Vysie or Vyse, now commonly sung to dancers, and the simple song. By
  the account he gave of the matter, the first seems to have been valued
  chiefly for its subject, and was commonly repeated in winter by the
  fireside; the second seems to have been used in public gatherings, now
  only sung to the dance; and the third at both.” (Low’s MS.)

Footnote 212:

  In the Stockholm edition of Snorro’s Edda, it was Hilda, by her
  enchantments, who raised the slain, as fast as they fell, to renew the
  combat, and the episode of Ivar Liomi and the Christian additions do
  not occur. Allusions to Hogni’s daughter Hilda occur in the stanzas of
  Eyvind Skaldaspiller (Saga of Harald Harfagri, chap. 13), and in those
  of Einar Skalaglum (Harald Grafeld’s Saga, chap. 6, and Olaf
  Tryggvason’s Saga, chap. 18).

Footnote 213:

  For descriptions and readings of these see Munch’s Chronicon Manniæ,
  Christiania, 1860; Cumming’s Runic and other Monumental Remains in the
  Isle of Man, London, 1857; and Worsaae’s Danes and Northmen, London,
  1852.

Footnote 214:

  It is no less singular to find a Rune-inscribed stone so far up the
  valley of the Spey as Knockando in Morayshire. See Sculpt. Stones of
  Scotland, i. p. 61.

Footnote 215:

  This fragment, which is now in the museum of the Society of
  Antiquaries of Scotland, is figured and described by Professor George
  Stephens of Copenhagen, in the “Illustreret Tidende” for 20th July
  1873, and will be included in the third volume of his great work on
  the Runic monuments of Scandinavia and England, now preparing for the
  press.

Footnote 216:

  See the note at p. 107 of the Saga.

Footnote 217:

  “Description by Ahmed Ibn Fozlan (an eye-witness) of the ceremonies
  attending the incremation of the dead body of a Norse chief, written
  in the early part of the 10th century. Translated from Holmboe’s
  Danish version of the Arabic original, with notes on the origin of
  cremation and its continuance, by Joseph Anderson, Keeper of the
  Museum.” Printed in the Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of
  Scotland, vol. ix.

Footnote 218:

  A large number of these stone kettles, made of steatite, and furnished
  with iron “bows,” exactly like those of our modern cast-iron pots, are
  preserved in the Christiania Museum, filled, as they were found, with
  the burned bones of the former owners. Sometimes the sword of the
  owner is found twisted and broken, and laid on the top of the bones.

Footnote 219:

  There are upwards of 400 of these brooches in the museum at Stockholm,
  nearly half as many in Christiania, and a large number in Copenhagen.

Footnote 220:

  The other one is in the museum at Copenhagen, and is figured in
  Worsaae’s Danes and Northmen, p. 255.

Footnote 221:

  Mem. de la Soc. Antiq. du Nord, 1840-44, p. 79.

Footnote 222:

  For full details of this remarkable group of interments, see Wilson’s
  Prehistoric Annals of Scotland, vol. ii. p. 303, and Journal of the
  British Archæological Association, vol. ii. p. 329.

Footnote 223:

  The events narrated in this chapter are told with greater fulness of
  detail in the extracts from the Flateyjarbók given in the Appendix.

Footnote 224:

  _Vikinga-boeli_, a vik-ing station, or haunt of the sea-rovers, who
  harried the coasts wherever they could find plunder. From _vik_, a bay
  or creek, are formed the nouns _viking_, denoting the species of
  plundering, and _vikingr_, denoting a person engaged in it.

Footnote 225:

  Moeri, a province of Norway, lying southwards of Drontheim (Saga of
  Harald Harfagri, chap. x). The word signifies a plain bordering on the
  sea.

Footnote 226:

  “He was called Torf-Einar because he cut peat for fuel.” (See
  Appendix).

Footnote 227:

  A son of Harald Harfagri.

Footnote 228:

  Rinansey, North Ronaldsay. Munch suggests that the form Ronansey
  implies its derivation from St. Ronan or Ninian, and that the name is
  therefore older than the Norse colonisation. St. Ninian is often
  called St. Ringan, and Ringansey seems quite a probable derivation of
  Rinansey.

Footnote 229:

  This is represented in the Saga of King Harald as a fine exacted by
  Harald for the death of his son, and paid by the Earl for the _bœndr_
  or freeholders who surrendered their odal lands to him in
  consideration of being freed from this payment (see Appendix).

Footnote 230:

  A poem by Thorbiörn Hornklofe, quoted in the Saga of Harald Harfagri.

Footnote 231:

  Son and successor of Harald Harfagri.

Footnote 232:

  They fell in battle in England, with King Eric Bloodyaxe, and “five
  kings,” as told in the Saga of Hakon the Good. The place where this
  battle was fought has not been satisfactorily identified.

Footnote 233:

  Dungad, called also Dungal, was a native chieftain, Maormor, or
  “Jarl,” in the north-east corner of Caithness, who seems to have
  considered the policy of conciliation preferable to that of
  resistance, judging from the intimate relations he formed with the
  foreigners, marrying the daughter of one, and giving his daughter in
  marriage to another, of the chiefs of the invaders. His _bœ_ or hamlet
  of residence became on this account so well known to the Norsemen,
  that they named the district of Dungalsbae (now Duncansbay) by it, and
  spoke of the headland (now Duncansbay Head) on which it was situated,
  as Dungalsness, or Duncan’s cape. The supposed remains of his castle
  were seen by Pennant in 1796, and are described by him as the ruins of
  a circular building, in all probability one of the “burghs” or
  circular towers so common in the north of Scotland, which seem to have
  been the defensive habitations of the native Celtic or Pictish
  population of the period between the 6th and 9th or 10th centuries. It
  is now a green mound. From the Session Records of the parish it
  appears that the district retained its ancient name of “Dungasby” down
  to the beginning of the last century, when it first appears as
  Duncansbay, and to this day it is called “Dungsby” by the older
  inhabitants. The name of the adjacent district of Canisbay, now
  applied to the whole parish, is similarly derived from _Conan’s bæ_.
  It appears between 1223 and 1245 as Canenesbi (Sutherland Charters),
  and in Blaeu’s Atlas, the MS. maps of which were drawn (_circa_ 1620),
  by Mr. Timothy Pont, the minister of the adjacent parish of Dunnet, it
  is marked Conansbay. These two, Duncan and Conan, are the only native
  chieftains of Caithness at the time of the Norse invasion whose names
  have come down to us, probably because they were the only ones who
  held friendly relations with the invaders.

Footnote 234:

  In the Saga of Olaf, Tryggvi’s son, it is said that Earl Sigurd lay at
  Asmundarvag, now Osmundwall, in the south end of the island of Hoy.
  There is a place called Roray on the west side of the island, which
  might be the ancient Rörvag.

Footnote 235:

  Munch (Chronicon Manniæ, p. 46) alludes to the mistake so common among
  the historians of Scotland to confound the _two_ Malcolms, and to make
  one of them, as if one Malcolm only (Malcolm II.) reigned from 1004 to
  1034. Though this theory has been ingeniously supported from a Norse
  point of view, it is at variance with the concurrent testimony of the
  early Scottish Chronicles. The Saga is the only authority for this
  marriage; but admitting its testimony on this point to be unassailable
  scarcely necessitates the repudiation of the authority of the Scottish
  Chronicles on the question of the succession. (Compare Skene’s
  Highlanders, chap. 5; Robertson’s Scotland under her Early Kings, vol.
  ii. p. 447; and Fordun (Skene’s edition), text and notes.)

Footnote 236:

  Olaf, Tryggvi’s son, fell at the battle of Svöldr, A.D. 1000.

Footnote 237:

  The battle of Clontarf, A.D. 1014 (see the Introduction). The Iceland
  Annals say that he held the earldom for sixty-two years, so that he
  must have become Earl in A.D. 952; but Munch makes his true period to
  be 980-1014.

Footnote 238:

  The word _Bóndi_ (pl. _Bœndr_), literally “a resident” or “dweller,”
  has no English equivalent, although the form remains in the words
  “husband” and “husbandman,” (hus-bondi, house-dweller or
  house-master). The Bœndr were freeholders by odal tenure, proprietors
  of the lands which they had inherited by succession from the original
  “land-takers.” “In the primitive form of Scandinavian society,” says
  Balfour, in his Odal Rights and Feudal Wrongs, “land was the only
  wealth, its ownership the sole foundation of power, privilege, or
  dignity. As no man could win or hold possession without the strong arm
  to defend it, every landowner was a warrior, every warrior a
  husbandman. King Sigurd Syr tended his own hay harvest, and Sweyn of
  Gairsay and Thorkel Fóstri swept the coasts of Britain or Ireland
  while the crops which they and their rovers had sown grew ready for
  their reaping.” The use of the ancient term survived in Orkney till
  1529, as we learn from the description by Jo. Ben, that in the parish
  of Rendale the people saluted each other with “Goand da boundæ” (i.e.
  _godan dag bondi!_) instead of the “Guid day, gudeman,” of the
  Scottish vernacular. Among the documents found in the king’s treasury
  at Edinburgh in 1282, was one entitled “A quit-claiming of the lands
  of the _bondi_ of Caithness for the slaughter of the Bishop,”—viz.
  Bishop Adam, who was burned at Halkirk in 1222 by the “_bondi_,”
  exasperated by his exactions. Although the word is Icelandic, it has
  been retained in the translation as a convenient term to designate the
  class, in preference to such periphrastic renderings as
  “farmer-lairds,” “peasant proprietors,” or “peasant nobles,” as are
  usually employed.

Footnote 239:

  Hrossey (Horse Isle) was the name given by the Norsemen to the
  mainland of the Orkney group. The Sandvik here mentioned as the
  residence of Amundi and Thorkel can only be the Sandvik (now Sandwick)
  on Deerness. When Thorfinn drew his vessels in under Deerness before
  he was attacked by Kali Hundason (chap. v.), he sent to Thorkel asking
  him to collect men and come to his assistance. Thorkel’s residence
  could not therefore have been far from Deerness, although the mention
  of Laufandaness is somewhat suggestive of Lopness in Sanday.

Footnote 240:

  The Things were local or general assemblies for determining by public
  agreement the course that should be pursued with reference to matters
  affecting the common weal or the public peace. All odal-born freemen
  (not under outlawry) had an equal voice, and king, earl, or common
  bondi, met on the thingstead on equal terms, as thingmen.

Footnote 241:

  Ulfreksfiord seems to have been the Norse name of Lough Larne, which
  in a document of the reign of the Irish King John (A.D. 1210) is
  styled _Wulvricheford_ (Worsaae’s Danes and Northmen, p. 311). It is
  suggestive of the identification of this Lough as the scene of Earl
  Einar’s defeat, that Norse burials have been discovered at Larne. One
  of these is described in the Crania Britannica, pl. 56. The form of
  the iron sword found buried with the skeleton, having a short guard
  and triangular pommel, establishes its Norwegian character.

Footnote 242:

  Konufögr is plainly the Norse form of the Irish Conchobhar. Several
  Irish kings of this name are mentioned in the Annals.

Footnote 243:

  Eyvind Urarhorn was a Lenderman (or Baron) of King Olaf Haraldson. He
  had gone to Ireland to King Conchobhar previous to Einar’s expedition,
  and had assisted the Irish against the Orkneymen. The Saga of Olaf
  Haraldson says that Earl Einar was much displeased with the Northmen
  who had been in the battle on the side of the Irish king, and seized
  this opportunity of wreaking his vengeance on Eyvind, their leader.

Footnote 244:

  Asmundarvag, now Osmundwall, in the south end of the island of Hoy.
  The termination _vágr_ usually becomes _wall_, as Kirkiuvagr, which in
  the modern form is Kirkwall.

Footnote 245:

  Olaf Haraldson, surnamed “the Holy,” and afterwards known as St. Olaf,
  who became king in the year 1015.

Footnote 246:

  Now Sandwick, in Deerness.

Footnote 247:

  In the Saga of Harald Harfagri it is stated (chap. vi.) that “King
  Harald made this law over all the lands he conquered, that all the
  odal possessions should be his, and that the Bœndr, both great and
  small, should pay him land-dues for their possessions.” Thus he put an
  end to odal right, in its pure and simple form at least, wherever he
  extended his authority; and the Bœndr, thus taxed and deprived of
  their odal rights, complained, with justice, that they were changed
  from a class of proprietary nobles into a class of tributary tenantry.
  Having assumed the ownership of the earldom of Orkney as his own by
  conquest, his heirs became the odal-born lords of Orkney, while the
  Earls were theoretically the liegemen of the Kings of Norway, though
  having also an odal right to the earldom which the royal prerogative
  could not set aside.

Footnote 248:

  If like meets like, or if you be met in the same spirit as you come.

Footnote 249:

  The word is _hirdman_. The hirdmen were the King’s body-guard.

Footnote 250:

  The _manbote_ (or fine for manslaughter) for every Norwegian Lenderman
  or Baron was fixed at 6 marks of silver, by the Older Gula-thing.

Footnote 251:

  Malcolm II., King of Scotland.

Footnote 252:

  The identity of Karl or Kali Hundason is one of the historical puzzles
  which exercise the ingenuity of modern historians. Supposing the Saga
  name of this individual to be a Norse corruption of the name of a
  Scottish king, it resembles none more nearly than that of Culen
  Induffson, the Culen Mac Induff of the _Chronica Pictorum_. But if
  Kali Hundason be intended for Culen Induffson, the dates do not agree
  by more than sixty years. On the other hand, supposing the events here
  narrated to be of the period assigned to them by the Saga, Kali
  Hundason ought to be Duncan, son of Crinan, Abbot of Dunkeld, who was
  the grandson and successor of King Malcolm Mac Kenneth. But Fordun
  states that Duncan’s succession was a peaceful one. It is not to be
  overlooked, however, that Earl Thorfinn was also a grandson of Malcolm
  Mac Kenneth; and if we could account for the discrepancy as to the
  name given by the Saga, the war between the two grandsons of the
  deceased monarch might readily be accounted for. For full details of
  the speculations regarding the identity of Kali Hundason, see Skene’s
  Highlanders of Scotland, chap. v.; the Irish version of “Nennius”
  (Irish Archæological Society), Appendix, p. 78; Robertson’s Scotland
  under her Early Kings, vol. ii. p. 477; and Munch’s Norske Folks
  Historie, vol. i. pt. 2, p. 854.

Footnote 253:

  The words “at Beruvik” in Jonæus’s edition are not in the
  Flateyjarbók. Two places of this name are mentioned in the Saga. One
  of these is plainly Berwick-on-Tweed (chap. xcii.) The locality of the
  other (which must be the “Beruvik” of this passage) is fixed by the
  statement in chap. xciv., where it is said that Earl Rögnvald was then
  in Sutherland celebrating the marriage of his daughter with Eirik
  Slagbrellir; and when word was brought to him that Harald had come to
  Thurso, he rode with a number of his followers “from Beruvik to
  Thurso.” It has been conjectured that the place here indicated was
  _Caistal a Bharruick_, an old square tower situated on an eminence
  near Kirkiboll, on the east side of the shore of the Kyle of Tongue
  (_Orig. Parochiales_, vol. ii. p. 717). Judging from the context,
  however, it seems more likely that it may have been the _vik_ or inlet
  at the mouth of the water of Berriedale (Berudal), on the southern
  border of Caithness, where there are also the ruins of an old square
  tower—the Castle of Berriedale. This agrees with the statement that
  King Kali, sailing _northward_ from Beruvik, saw the sails of
  Thorfinn’s ships going towards Deerness, as he sailed into the mouth
  of the Firth from the east. Had Kali come from the Kyle of Tongue, he
  would have sailed _east_, and Thorfinn would have seen and intercepted
  him from Duncansbay.

Footnote 254:

  Now Sandwick, in Deerness, Orkney.

Footnote 255:

  Broad Firth—the Moray Firth.

Footnote 256:

  Torfness, the scene of the final conflict between Earl Thorfinn and
  Kali Hundason, is here described as on the south side of Bæfiord, and
  by Arnor, the Earls’ skald, as south of Ekkial, the river Oikel, which
  gave its name to Ekkiálsbakká, or the district along the banks of the
  Oikel and its estuary—the Kyle of Sutherland—which formed the march
  between the territory of the Norse earls and Scotland. Torfness may
  thus be conjectured to be Tarbatness, although we have nothing to fix
  the locality more definitely. Bæfiord, in this case, would be the
  wider portion of the Dornoch Firth. Munch suggests that the seemingly
  French name of Beaufort Castle may be a corruption of Bæfiord (which
  in that case would be the Beauly Frith); but in all probability the
  name Beaufort is what it seems to be, and much more modern.

Footnote 257:

  In which King Olaf Haraldson (the Holy) was killed, A.D. 1030.

Footnote 258:

  The Kjölen mountains, part of the range separating Norway from Sweden.

Footnote 259:

  Hólmgard, now Novgorod, formerly Cholmogori, in Russia, which the
  Northmen called Gardariki.

Footnote 260:

  The town of Ladoga, which Rurik, the first King of Russia, made his
  capital in the 9th century. It is now a mere hamlet.

Footnote 261:

  Alfifa, queen of Canute the Great.

Footnote 262:

  Ingigerd, daughter of King Olaf of Sweden, was married to King
  Jarizleif. She stipulated that Rögnvald should accompany her to
  Russia, and he received the town and earldom of Ladoga (Aldeigiuborg).

Footnote 263:

  Nídarós, now the town of Drontheim, so called from its being situated
  at the mouth of the river Nid.

Footnote 264:

  King Olaf adjudged Earl Einar’s third of the islands to be forfeited
  for the slaying of Eyvind Urarhorn. (See chap. v.)

Footnote 265:

  _Skotlandsfiord_, Scotland’s Firth, was the name given to the channel
  between the Hebrides and the mainland of Scotland. (See chap. xxx.)

Footnote 266:

  Vatnsfiord, probably Loch Vattin, an arm of the sea branching off Loch
  Bracadale, in Skye.

Footnote 267:

  Gaddgedlar.—This passage has given rise to a variety of conjectures.
  None of the explanations which have yet been offered are free from
  difficulties. Munch (_Chronicon Manniæ_, p. 46) says that, considering
  the situation of Caithness, and how well the author of the saga must
  have known it, it becomes evident that between “Caithness” and “at the
  place” an _and_ must have been dropped by the subsequent writer, who,
  living about A.D. 1380, and in Iceland (this part of the saga existing
  only in the _Codex Flateyensis_), might easily have dropped an _ok_
  (or the abbreviation thereof), not conscious of the great blunder he
  committed. He further adds that Gaddgedlar is evidently the Norse
  corruption of “Galwydia,” Galloway. This explanation is open to the
  objections that, besides the improbability of Thorfinn having dwelt
  for the most part in Caithness and in Galloway, the latter place does
  not fit the description that there Scotland and England meet. The word
  _eingland_, signifying meadow, or strath land, may possibly have been
  used as a general term for “The Dales of Caithness,” if it may not be
  supposed to be a mis-transcription of the word _eignarland_, meaning
  Thorfinn’s own territory. Gaddgedlar might be the Norse pronunciation
  of the native word Gall-gael, applied to the mixed population of the
  districts where the Norse element had not entirely displaced the
  Celtic, or the border districts between the Norse earldom and the
  purely Celtic territory “where Scotland and his (Thorfinn’s) own land
  meet.”

Footnote 268:

  Raudabiorg, or Red Headland, must be looked for in the neighbourhood
  of Dunnet Head, where the red beds of the Old Red Sandstone form the
  distinctive feature of the coast. A little to the east of Dunnet Head
  there is an outlying crag named Brough of Rattar, or Rattar Brough—in
  all probability a corrupted form of the old name Raudabiorg. Still
  farther to the eastward, where the burn of Rattar enters the Firth,
  are the ruins of an old “Pictish tower,” or broch—in old Norse,
  _borg_. In its immediate vicinity is a little promontory called Kirk
  o’ Taing (_Kirkiu Tunga_, the Tongue, or Ness of the Kirk), on which
  are the ruins of one of the small rudely-built chapels of the early
  Christian time. On the north side of the chapel the edges of a number
  of stone cists are visible through the turf; and from two of these,
  which were dug up in cutting a drain in the spring of 1872, eight
  silver armlets of the ancient penannular form were obtained. These
  correspond exactly with the armlets which formed part of the great
  hoard exhumed at Skaill, in Orkney, on the opposite side of the Firth,
  with Cufic and Anglo-Saxon coins of the tenth century—in all
  probability a hoard deposited by some of the vikings on their return
  from a plundering expedition. As Earl Thorfinn and his men were
  Christians, it seems probable that, if the chapel was then in
  existence, the bodies of the seventy slain in the fight off
  Raudabiorg, which were landed here, would be buried in the consecrated
  ground attached to this chapel.

Footnote 269:

  The Mainland of Orkney.

Footnote 270:

  The two Papeys, the great and the little (anciently Papey meiri and
  Papey minni), now Papa Westray and Papa Stronsay, are both mentioned
  in the Saga. Fordun, in his enumeration of the islands, has a “Papeay
  tertia,” which is not now known. There are three islands in Shetland
  called Papey, and both in Orkney and Shetland there are several
  districts named Paplay or Papplay, doubtless the same as the Papyli of
  Iceland. Munch considers that these names betray a Kelto-Christian
  origin. They probably indicate the settlements of Irish ecclesiastics
  in the islands previous to the arrival of the Northmen. The recent
  discoveries in Orkney of ecclesiastical bells of the early square
  form, and of stone monuments with Ogham inscriptions (in one case
  associated with a figure of the cross of an early form), seem to point
  to the settlement of ecclesiastical communities in the islands at a
  very early period. (See Introduction.)

Footnote 271:

  Now Papa Westray.

Footnote 272:

  King of Denmark.

Footnote 273:

  Harald Sigurdson is the famous Harald Hardradi who afterwards fell at
  the battle of Stamford Bridge, near York, fighting against Harald
  Godwinson the Saxon King of England, in 1066.

Footnote 274:

  A small island off Lindesnes, in the south of Norway.

Footnote 275:

  The district round the head of the Christiania Fiord.

Footnote 276:

  Scania, the southern part of Sweden.

Footnote 277:

  Aalborg, in Jutland.

Footnote 278:

  Earl Thorfinn’s pilgrimage to Rome took place most probably about the
  year 1050. King Magnus died in A.D. 1047, and some time must have
  elapsed before Thorfinn heard of his death. Then his messengers went
  to Norway, and returned; and his own expedition was thereafter
  prepared. After visiting King Harald Hardradi in Norway, he stayed
  some time with Svend Estridson, the King of Denmark. Then he visited
  Henry III., Emperor of Germany, and would probably reach Rome soon
  after the accession of Pope Leo IX., who occupied the Papal throne
  from 1049 to 1055. As Macbeth, the only Scottish sovereign who ever
  visited the city of Rome, made his pilgrimage thither in the year
  1050, and Thorfinn and he were close friends and allies, it is
  probable that they went together. (Compare Saga of King Harald
  Hardradi; Wyntoun, vol. ii. pp. 468, 469; Marianus Scotus, in Mon.
  Hist. Brit., p. 604; Florence of Worcester; Chron. de Mailros;
  Ritson’s Annals, vol. ii. p. 116; Skene’s Highlanders, chap. v.;
  Grub’s Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, chap. xiii.)

Footnote 279:

  This quotation from Arnór seems to have reference only to Thorfinn’s
  conquests in Ireland. Doubtless the extent of these is considerably
  exaggerated. The Thussasker appear to be the outlying skerries off the
  S.E. of Ireland, still known as the Tuscar Rocks.

Footnote 280:

  Malcolm II., Mac Kenneth.

Footnote 281:

  Harald Sigurdson (Hardradi) was slain at Stamford Bridge in 1066, and
  Earl Thorfinn died in 1064.

Footnote 282:

  Transferred their allegiance to the native chieftains, to whom they
  belonged by hereditary right.

Footnote 283:

  This marriage is unknown in Scottish history, and rests on the
  authority of the Sagas alone. Duncan is said by the Scottish
  historians to have been a bastard, while the Sagas make him the
  legitimate offspring of Malcolm and Ingibiorg, who must by this time
  have been old enough to be Malcolm’s mother. She was married to Earl
  Thorfinn before Kálf Arnason was banished by King Magnus (chap. xiv.),
  which was some time between 1036 and 1041. Earl Thorfinn died in 1064,
  seven years after King Malcolm was crowned at Scone, in 1057.
  Malcolm’s marriage with the Princess Margaret of England took place in
  1067, or less than three years after Ingibiorg became a widow. Munch
  supposes that Ingibiorg must have died in childbed with Duncan, and
  suggests that the fact that Duncan claimed the crown before Edgar, the
  son of Malcolm by Margaret, may be taken as showing that he must have
  been the offspring of a previous marriage. Macpherson (Wyntoun, vol.
  ii. p. 472), while accepting the statement of the Saga, accounts for
  Duncan being called a bastard from the circumstance that Malcolm’s
  marriage with Ingibiorg was within the degrees of propinquity
  forbidden by the canon law.

Footnote 284:

  This William Odling (the Noble) is William of Egremont (the boy of
  Egremont), son of William Fitz Duncan, and consequently grandson of
  Duncan. The reference here to him as the person whom all the Scots
  wished to have for their king is explained by the fact that, on the
  death of David I., by the old Celtic law of succession, he became in
  the eyes of the Celtic population the rightful heir to the throne; and
  his claims were supported by no fewer than seven Earls, among whom
  were those of Strathern, Ross, and Orkney. The insurrection was
  speedily put down, but the claim was subsequently revived by Donald
  Bane Macwilliam, who, on the same principle, obtained the support of
  the northern chiefs. (See Skene’s Highlanders of Scotland for a full
  account of the conflict between the feudal and the Celtic systems of
  succession.)

Footnote 285:

  This is a mistake. Morkere was present at the battle of Hastings, and
  he and Waltheof went afterwards to Normandy with William the
  Conqueror.

Footnote 286:

  Fordun (v. chap. i.) records the landing of Macduff “at Ravynsore in
  England.” Camden mentions a place on Holderness, at the mouth of the
  Humber, formerly called Ravensere. It no longer exists, having been
  destroyed by the encroachments of the sea.

Footnote 287:

  Now called the Mainland of Orkney.

Footnote 288:

  The reference here must be supposed to be to the murder of St. Magnus.

Footnote 289:

  “Hugh the Stout” was Hugh, Earl of Chester; and “Hugh the Bold,” Hugh
  of Montgomery, Earl of Salop. According to Odericus Vitalis, King
  Magnus came into the Menai Straits with only six ships, carrying a red
  shield on the mast as a sign of peace and commercial intercourse. The
  Welsh King Griffith was at that time engaged in war with the Norman
  Earls above mentioned, who had invaded his territories, and advanced
  as far as the Straits, when the arrival of King Magnus gave an
  unexpected turn to the course of events, in the death of the Earl of
  Montgomery, as here narrated.

Footnote 290:

  Hálogaland, the most northern part of Norway.

Footnote 291:

  The Saga writer (says Munch) has been here misled by the Scottish
  denomination of the reigning monarch, Edgar MacMalcolm. Malcolm
  Canmore died in 1093, the year of King Magnus’s first expedition to
  the west. The second expedition, which was in 1098, was the one in
  which he fought with the two Norman Earls in Anglesea Sound. The
  events of the two expeditions are here mixed up together, and the
  references to Malcolm Canmore do not synchronise with either. It is
  possible that the offer of the islands (as here mentioned) may have
  come to King Magnus from Donald Bane, the brother of King Malcolm, to
  secure the support of King Magnus in his attempt to retain the throne
  against Edgar, although the incident of the drawing of the boat across
  the isthmus may have taken place in the reign of Edgar. The
  “Fagrskinna” (p. 156) adds that King Malcolm of Scotland, sent his
  daughter out to the Orkneys to be married to Magnus’s son Sigurd, he
  being then nine and she five years of age, and that he left her in the
  Orkneys when he went to Norway. The author has confounded Malcolm with
  Mýrkiartan.

Footnote 292:

  Pennant mentions (1772) that not long previously it was customary for
  vessels of nine or ten tons to be drawn across the isthmus by horses,
  in order to avoid the dangerous and circuitous passage round the Mull.

Footnote 293:

  Scotland’s Firth—the channel between the west coast of Scotland and
  the Hebrides.

Footnote 294:

  Muircearteach, grandson of Brian Boroimhe, King of Munster.

Footnote 295:

  Now Drontheim, so called because situated at the mouth of the Nid.

Footnote 296:

  See note at p. 38.

Footnote 297:

  Ulster, in Ireland.

Footnote 298:

  King Sigurd, the Jorsala-farer, set out on his pilgrimage to Jerusalem
  in 1107.

Footnote 299:

  Borgarfiord, the “fiord of the Borg,” now Burra Firth, on the west
  side of the Mainland of Shetland, so named by the Norsemen on account
  of the “borg,” or “Pictish tower,” which still stands on the little
  holm of Hebrista, though greatly ruined. It is probable that the
  reason of Thorbiörn’s connection with Borgarfiord was its affording
  him and his followers a shelter and defensive position in the borg.
  The old name Borgarfiord occurs in a document in the Norse language
  dated 1299. It is a record drawn up in the Lagthing of certain charges
  made against Herr Thorvald Thoresson, by a woman named Ragnhild
  Simonsdatter, who accuses him of malversation of the land-rents of
  Brekasettr. (_Diplom. Norvegicum_, vol. i. p. 81.) Harald of
  Borgarfiord in Shetland witnesses a document in 1498.

Footnote 300:

  The place where the Orkney Things were held is nowhere more
  particularly indicated. Stennis has been suggested, on the supposition
  that the great stone circle there would have been thus utilised by the
  Northmen. It does not appear, however, that the occasion on which
  Havard, son of Thorfinn Hausakliuf, was killed at “Steinsness” was a
  Thing meeting there, and this is the only occasion on which Stennis is
  mentioned in the whole of the Flateyjarbók. “Tingwale,” in the parish
  of Rendale, occurs in the Orkney Land List of 1502. This seems to be
  the only trace of the old Thing-völl in Hrossey.

Footnote 301:

  Egilsey, in Jo. Ben’s description of the Orkneys (1529) called
  “Insularum Ecclesia,” is regarded by Munch as deriving its name not
  from the Norse proper name _Egil_, but from the Irish _Eaglais_, a
  church. “To this day,” he says, “Egilsey contains a church shown by
  its construction to have been built before the Northmen arrived in
  Orkney, or at all events to belong to the more ancient Christian
  Celtic population. (See under “Egilsey” in the Introduction).

Footnote 302:

  These dates are self-contradictory, and utterly irreconcilable. King
  Magnus Barelegs fell in Ireland in the year 1103; and it is stated in
  the Saga of Sigurd, the Jorsala-farer, that Hákon, Paul’s son, came to
  Norway to King Sigurd “a year or two after King Magnus’s fall.” The
  King gave him the earldom and government of the Orkneys, and he went
  back immediately to Orkney. Then it is added that four years after the
  fall of King Magnus—that is, in 1107—King Sigurd set out on his
  pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Now, it is mentioned in this Saga (chap.
  xxxiii.) that Earl Magnus went to Norway to see King Eystein, “for
  King Sigurd had then gone to Jerusalem.” This must have been after
  1107. King Eystein gave him his patrimony, one-half of the Orkneys. If
  his visit to Norway was in the year after King Sigurd’s departure, as
  seems likely from the narrative, or in 1108, and “he had been seven
  winters Earl in the Orkneys along with Earl Hákon,” this would bring
  the date of his death exactly to the year assigned in the Iceland
  Annals appended to the Flateyjarbók, or to 1115. The entry in the
  “Annalar” for that year is: “Pindr enn heilagi Magnus jarl i
  Orkneyium.” Torfæus dates this event in 1110. The Saga of St. Magnus
  says he had been twelve winters Earl of the Orkneys jointly with
  Hákon, counting evidently from the vacancy of earldom in 1103 by the
  accession of Sigurd, Magnus’ son, then Earl of the Orkneys, to the
  throne of Norway. This also gives the date 1115.

Footnote 303:

  A curious catalogue of cases in which diseased and infirm people were
  miraculously restored to health and vigour, after paying their vows at
  the shrine of St. Magnus, is given in the Magnus Saga. These pilgrims
  mostly came from Shetland. Two of the cases are interesting as
  affording the earliest notices of leprosy (_líkthrá_) in Shetland—a
  disease which seems to have continued in the Islands till towards the
  close of the last century.—(Sir James Simpson’s Archæological
  Essays—Leprosy and Leper Hospitals in Britain.) These cases appear to
  have been overlooked by Sir James. Schröder has published a curious
  Swedish version of the story of St. Magnus, in which the account of
  his miracles is considerably varied.

Footnote 304:

  That is for sixty-six years. As William died, according to the
  Icelandic Annals, in 1168, and was bishop in the year of St. Magnus’s
  death, 1115, he was undoubtedly bishop for fifty-three years. That he
  was bishop for the long period of sixty-six years, as this passage
  seems to imply, may be open to some doubt. Munch supposes that the
  “seventh decade” may be an error for “sixth.” This would place his
  consecration to the see of Orkney in 1112; but the Saga of St. Magnus
  says he was bishop sixty-six years.

Footnote 305:

  Rekavík is either the modern Rackwick, on the northern point of the
  Island of Westray, in Orkney, or Rackwick, in the Island of Hoy; more
  probably the latter.

Footnote 306:

  Sigurd Slembir or Slembidiakn had a most romantic history. In his
  youth he was considered the son of a priest, Adalbrekt by name, and
  was brought up for the church. His tastes appear to have lain in quite
  another direction, however; and he soon broke loose from the
  restraints of ecclesiastical life. He gave himself out as an
  illegitimate son of King Magnus Barelegs, and commenced a life of
  roving and adventure, visiting the Holy Land, and turning an honest
  penny occasionally by trading expeditions to Scotland, the Orkneys,
  Ireland, and Denmark. In the latter country he proved his paternity by
  the ordeal of hot iron, as King Harald Gilli had done. He then went to
  King Harald, and asked him to recognise him; but instead of this he
  was placed on his trial for the slaying of Thorkel Fóstri, Sumarlidi’s
  son. He managed to make his escape by jumping overboard with two of
  his guards in his arms, and soon after returned and killed King Harald
  Gilli in his bed in Bergen. Then he tried to place Magnus the Blind on
  the throne by assistance from Denmark; but the expedition was met on
  the south coast of Norway by the sons of King Harald, and totally
  defeated. Magnus was slain, and Sigurd Slembir was taken, and put to
  death with almost incredible tortures. (See the account of him in the
  Sagas of Magnus the Blind and the sons of Harald in the Heimskringla.)

Footnote 307:

  Westness, in Rousay (Hrólfsey), see p. 73.

Footnote 308:

  Thorkel Fóstri Sumarlidi’s son, foster-father to Earl Paul, not to be
  confounded with Thorkel Fóstri, Amundi’s son, previously noticed as
  foster-father to Earl Thorfinn Sigurdson.

Footnote 309:

  Stofa. In the twelfth century men began to live more comfortably, and
  broke up their large halls into separate compartments. Thus, a portion
  of the Skáli at the upper end, where the pall or dais was, was shut
  off, and called _stofa_.—(Dasent’s preface to the Njals Saga.)

Footnote 310:

  Gefsisness. No place answering to this name can now be traced in
  Westray, but a various reading of the passage has Reppisness; and
  there is a place on the south-east side of the island still called
  Rapness, probably the place here indicated.

Footnote 311:

  Fluguness does not again occur in the saga, and has not been
  identified. It is the same as the Flydruness of p. 92.

Footnote 312:

  Knarrarstadir seems to signify the district at the head of Scapa Bay,
  south of Kirkwall. Munch derives the name from _knörr_, a
  merchant-ship. It is said at p. 110 that Játvör and her son Borgar
  lived at Geitaberg, which seems to be the place now called Gatnip, on
  the east side of Scapa, anciently Scalpeid.

Footnote 313:

  Brekkur in Straumsey may have been the name of a homestead in the
  island of Stroma. There is some confusion as to the locality, however.
  It is said in chap. lxvii. to have been in Stronsay. The name is not
  now recognisable in either of the islands.

Footnote 314:

  Glaitness, near Kirkwall, is probably the modern representative of the
  ancient Glettuness. In the testament of Sir David Synclair of
  Swynbrocht (Sumburgh, in Shetland), in the year 1506, there is a
  bequest “to Thorrald of Brucht, and to his wife and his airis, ten
  merks land in Glaitness, and fifteen merks land in Linggo, with all
  guids there contenit, and twenty-two merks in Pappale, ten merks in
  Brucht.”

Footnote 315:

  Harald Gillichrist, who subsequently became King of Norway, under the
  name of King Harald Gilli. See p. 84, note.

Footnote 316:

  Comparing men. This was a favourite occupation of their leisure hours
  among the Northmen. A curious instance of it occurs in the Saga of
  King Sigurd, the Jorsala-farer, in the Heimskringla, where the
  narrative states that as the ale was not good the guests were very
  quiet and still, until King Eystein said, “It is a common custom over
  the ale-table to compare one person with another, and now let us do
  so.” As in this case, a quarrel was the usual result.

Footnote 317:

  Osló, or Opslo, was the old capital of Norway. Its site is now
  included in that of Christiania.

Footnote 318:

  Hauga-Thing, so called apparently because the place of meeting was a
  _haug_, or barrow. Whether this was a local name at Túnsberg, or
  whether it refers to a special assembly held at the burial-place of
  the King, is not clear.

Footnote 319:

  Harald Gillichrist, illegitimate son of King Magnus Barelegs, was of
  Celtic extraction, his mother being a native of the Hebrides. He and
  his mother were brought over to Norway from the Southern Hebrides in a
  ship belonging to a Norwegian merchant named Halkel Húk. When the
  story of Harald’s parentage was told to King Sigurd, he consented to
  allow Harald to prove his paternity by the ordeal of hot iron, but on
  condition, that if he succeeded in proving his descent according to
  his claim, he should not desire the kingdom in the lifetime either of
  King Sigurd or of his son, King Magnus, and to this Harald bound
  himself by oath. This seems to be the oath referred to as given under
  compulsion. “The ordeal,” it is added in the Saga of King Sigurd, “was
  the greatest ever made in Norway, for nine glowing ploughshares were
  laid down, and Harald walked over them with bare feet, attended by two
  bishops, and invoking the holy St. Columba”—another testimony to his
  Celtic birth. His feet were then bound up, and he was laid in bed.
  After the customary three days had elapsed, his feet were examined,
  or, as the Saga has it, “the ordeal was taken to proof, and his feet
  were found unburnt.” His claims were therefore held to have been
  proven, and made good. It is curious to find that among the privileges
  granted by the Scottish King David to the monks of Holyrood, they were
  specially empowered to make trials by the ordeal of hot iron.

Footnote 320:

  In Vík, in the south of Norway.

Footnote 321:

  Now Ferlof, in Sogn, Norway.

Footnote 322:

  Vík meant properly the bay of Oslo, the upper part of which is now
  called the Christiania Fiord, but it was also applied to the district
  bordering on the bay.

Footnote 323:

  Harald and Eric, Kings of Denmark, had sworn mutual brotherhood.

Footnote 324:

  Alasund is now Yell Sound, the ancient name for the island of Yell
  being Jala. In the latest known Hjaltland document, written in Norse,
  and dated in 1586, the name of the island appears as “Yella.”

Footnote 325:

  Outsittings, a peculiar kind of sorcery resorted to in order to obtain
  foreknowledge of the future, in which the person sat out at night
  under the open sky, and by certain magical rites or incantations
  summoned the dead from their graves to consult them. A curious
  instance is given in the 40th chapter of the Færeyinga Saga, in which
  Sigmund Brestisson is brought from the dead, with his head in his
  hand, to show who was his murderer.

Footnote 326:

  The Moul Head of Deerness.

Footnote 327:

  The Norsemen were in the habit of carrying stones on board their
  warships to be used as missiles. It is told in the Færeyinga Saga of
  Sigmund Brestisson that when about to attack the ships of another
  Viking lying on the opposite side of an island on the coast of Sweden,
  he spent the whole night in landing the goods and plunder from his
  vessels, and breaking up stones, and loading his vessel with them to
  serve as missiles in the attack. The same thing had been done by the
  Earl’s men in this case before the commencement of the fight.

Footnote 328:

  Probably at the place now called Swiney, in Caithness, near Lybster.
  Though the context here seems to imply that Swiney, in Caithness, is
  meant, it seems that Grim was in the island of Swona (the small island
  between Hoy and South Ronaldsay), when Swein, Asleif’s son, visited
  him (see p. 92). Perhaps Swiney, in Caithness, was so named from its
  being the property of Grim of Swona.

Footnote 329:

  Aurrida Firth, or Salmon-trout Firth, now the Bay of Firth.

Footnote 330:

  Flydruness seems to be the same as Fluguness, in Hrossey (Mainland),
  mentioned as the residence of Blan and his father Thorstein, at p. 74.

Footnote 331:

  The Earl’s seat at Orphir appears to have consisted of a cluster of
  buildings, of which the main hall or skáli answered to the public room
  of the residence. The descriptions given of the Orkney skális are
  wanting in that minuteness which is necessary to enable us to
  understand the details of their construction. No doubt they were
  similar to those of Iceland, the larger of which were constructed
  partly of stone and partly of timber, the middle division of the hall
  being higher in the roof than the “aisles” on either side of it, and
  separated from them by a row of pillars running parallel to each of
  the side walls. The walls of the aisles and the spaces between the
  pillars were covered with wainscoting, sometimes with carved work, and
  on high days hung with tapestry. Shields and weapons were hung along
  the sides of the hall, above the benches, and the fires were lit on
  hearths in the middle of the floor. The benches were ranged along both
  sides of the hall; the “high seat” of the Earl, or owner of the skáli,
  was in the centre of the south side, and the seats of highest honour
  were those next to him on either side.

Footnote 332:

  Probably a large flagstone set on end to serve as a partition-wall.
  This is a common feature of the ancient structures in Caithness and
  Orkney. It was in the shadow of this flagstone that Swein, Asleif’s
  son, stood when he killed Swein Brióstreip (see p. 95).

Footnote 333:

  Serving the table, and holding lights. The light-bearers or
  candle-holders were a distinct class of servants at the King’s court.
  This custom is said to have been first introduced by King Olaf Kyrre
  in the latter half of the eleventh century.

Footnote 334:

  The emptying of horns of ale to the memory of departed heroes and
  comrades, with the accompaniment of speeches setting forth their
  famous deeds, was a recognised custom at the festivals of the
  Northmen.

Footnote 335:

  Besides his evil repute as a turbulent fellow, Swein was suspected of
  sorcery, and thus obnoxious to the church (see p. 88).

Footnote 336:

  This must either he Paplay in South Ronaldsay, or Paplay on the
  Mainland. Munch says that the circumstance that the name of the island
  is always carefully added in the Saga when a Mainland district is not
  the one alluded to favours the supposition that it is the latter which
  is here meant.

Footnote 337:

  Gói, the fourth month of the year, corresponding to our February and
  part of March. The ancient mode of reckoning among the Northmen was by
  “winters,” the year commencing on the 23d November. Gói was sometimes
  called “horning-month”—the month in which the deer shed their horns;
  and it was also the month in which, in heathen times, the great annual
  sacrifice took place at Upsala, as mentioned in the Saga of King Olaf
  the Holy.

Footnote 338:

  _Höfn_, the haven, in Westray, is probably the modern Pierowall, the
  only safe natural harbour in the island, and the only place entitled
  to the name of “the haven.”

Footnote 339:

  The _thorp_ or village of Höfn here mentioned most likely stood on the
  shore by the landing-place at Pierowall. The fact that there are a
  number of graves on the links here, in which have been found the
  swords peculiar to the Norse viking period, shield-bosses, bronze
  tortoise brooches (a distinctively Scandinavian form), and other
  relics unquestionably of Norse origin, shows that the neighbourhood
  must have been largely frequented by the Northmen, and perhaps made a
  permanent settlement long before this time. The Church of Westray is
  mentioned among those vacant in 1327-28 by the Papal Nuncio, who
  collected the tithes for these years.

Footnote 340:

  Although there is a curious similarity between this incident and that
  related in chap. lxxi. on the occasion of the visit of Bishop John to
  the Orkneys, yet the fact of Earl Rögnvald turning the procession into
  ridicule, whereas Bishop John’s party appear to have been received
  with all due respect, suggests that the two narratives can scarcely
  refer to the same incident. The reference here to the “isle Elon,”
  taken in connection with the statement in chap. xcix. that there were
  monks on Eller Holm (named “Helene-holm” by Fordun), may mean that
  there was a colony of clerics on the little island, whose dress and
  tonsure may thus have tickled the fancy of the rhyming Earl. In the
  rental of Shapinsay (1642), Elgin-holme is set in feu to Sir John
  Buchanan for payment of 12s. annually. In 1529 Jo. Ben mentions that
  there were foundations of houses and even of a chapel on Eloerholme,
  though it was then waste and uninhabited (see chap. xcix). Neale
  notices “the ruins of a very small chapel” on Ellerholm
  (Ecclesiological Notes, p. 111).

Footnote 341:

  The Iceland Annals place Earl Rögnvald’s winning the Orkneys in the
  year 1136.

Footnote 342:

  Evie Sound; from _Efja_, now Evie.

Footnote 343:

  _Húdfat_—skin-bags, or sleeping haps, made of hides sewed together, so
  as to envelope the sleeper as in a sack.

Footnote 344:

  Still known as the Swelkie, a dangerous whirlpool in certain states of
  the tide, off the island of Stroma, fabled to be caused by the waters
  being sucked down through the eye of the quern “Grotti,” which once
  belonged to King Fródi. Grotti was found in Denmark, and was the
  largest quern that had ever been known. It would grind for King Fródi
  gold or peace, which he pleased. But the sea-king M['y]sing took
  Grotti, and caused white salt to be ground in his ships till they sank
  in Pentland’s Firth. This is why the Swelkie has been there ever
  since. As the waters fall through the eye of the quern, the sea roars
  as the quern grinds; and, moreover, this is how the sea first became
  salt.—(Elder Edda, Grottasöng.) Traces of this legend still linger in
  the locality.

Footnote 345:

  Ekkialsbakki is three times mentioned in the Flateyjarbók, and Ekkial
  once by Arnór Jarlaskáld (see p. 22). Earl Sigurd, Eystein’s son, who
  killed Malbrigd (Maormor of Mar according to Skene), was “hoy-laid”
  (buried in a how or barrow, _haugr_), on Ekkialsbakki. “There cannot
  be the least doubt,” says Worsaae, in his ‘Danes and Northmen,’ “that
  Ekkial is the river Oykill (Oykel), which still forms the southern
  boundary of Sutherland. But nobody is able to point out the barrow of
  Sigurd Jarl. The tradition relating to it has vanished with the
  Norwegian population.” But, fortunately, there are records more
  permanent and reliable than popular tradition, by which the truth of
  the Saga narrative may be verified, and the locality of Sigurd’s
  grave-mound indisputably fixed. There is a place near the Ferry on the
  north bank of the Dornoch Firth (into which the Oykel runs) which is
  now somewhat inappropriately called Cyder Hall. In Blaeu’s Atlas
  (1640) it appears as Siddera. In older charters it is conjoined with
  Skebo, and called Sythera. In a deed of the year 1275 the Bishop of
  Caithness claims right to “six davochs of Schythebolle and Sytheraw,
  with the ferry.” In the deed of constitution of the Cathedral Chapter
  of Caithness, executed between 1223 and 1245, there are assigned to
  the treasurer the rectorial tithes of Scytheboll and _Siwardhoch_, its
  conjunction with Scytheboll showing it to be the same place which is
  called at subsequent periods Sytheraw, Siddera, and Cyder Hall. This
  place, named Siward’s Hoch (_Sigurd’s haug_) at that early date, could
  be no other than the traditional site of Earl Sigurd’s grave-mound,
  and the Ekkialsbakki on which he was buried must thus have been the
  north bank of the Oykel’s estuary. But the Ekkialsbakki twice
  mentioned in connection with Swein Asleifson’s journey to Athole can
  scarcely be the same with that of the earlier narrative. It seems
  probable that in Swein Asleifson’s narrative the word may have been
  originally Atjoklsbakki—the coast on the side of the Breidafiord
  (Moray Firth) next to Atjöklar (Athole). The word _bakki_ is sometimes
  used for a “coast.” The Saga writer may have been misled by the
  similarity of sound to substitute Ekkialsbakki for Atjoklsbakki. (See
  p. 115.)

Footnote 346:

  The name of Maddad, Earl of Athole, appears in contemporary documents
  as Maddoc, Madach, and Madeth. In the foundation-charter of Scone by
  King Alexander I. and his queen Sibilla, “Madach Comes” is a witness.
  “Maddoc” and “Madeth Comes” also witness charters of King David I.
  From a charter by King Malcolm the Maiden, granting aid for the
  restoration of the Abbey of Scone, we learn that the style of the
  Earls of Athole was “Comes de Ethocl,” the Atjokl of the
  Saga.—(Regist. de Dunferm. Regist. de Scone.)

Footnote 347:

  Geitaberg is probably the place now known as Gatnip, on the east side
  of Scapa Bay, near Kirkwall. It is formerly stated that Játvör and her
  son Borgar lived at Knarrarstad, which is evidently the name for the
  district, while Geitaberg was the name of Borgar’s homestead. Gatnip
  is the highest point on that side of the bay, and thus Borgar was able
  to notice the barge rowed by Swein’s men as it passed up and down the
  Firth.

Footnote 348:

  Magnus, in the text here, is clearly a mistake for Hákon.

Footnote 349:

  The erection of St. Magnus’ Church was commenced apparently between
  the years 1136 and 1138. The remains of St. Magnus appear to have been
  transferred to it from Christ’s Church, in Birsay, previous to the
  departure of Earl Rögnvald to the Holy Land in 1152. After Earl
  Rögnvald’s death, in 1158, the building of the cathedral was carried
  on by Bishop William, until his death in 1168, after which we have no
  record of its progress.

Footnote 350:

  The odal tenure of the lands in the islands was first modified by
  Harald Harfagri in the time of the Earl Torf Einar. Earl Sigurd
  Hlödverson restored the odal rights in return for the assistance of
  the Bœndr at the battle of Skida Myre (see Appendix). This arrangement
  subsisted till the imposition of the succession-dues by Earl Rögnvald,
  which were subsequently bought up, as here narrated.

Footnote 351:

  Knarrarstad, as has been formerly explained, was applied to the
  district at the head of the Bay of Scapa. It was so called because it
  was the place where the merchant-ships lay—from _Knarrar_, genitive of
  _knörr_, a merchant-ship; and _stadr_, a stance or stead. The name is
  preserved in old estate-lists as _Knarstane_. In the near
  neighbourhood there is an ancient “broch” or “Pictish tower,” recently
  excavated by Mr. George Petrie. Remains of very extensive buildings
  have been found within and around it, evidently belonging to a
  secondary occupation of the tower, of later date than that of its
  original construction. Among the relics found in these secondary
  buildings there are some which correspond with relics of the later
  Viking period found in Scandinavia. This gives a certain amount of
  probability to the supposition that the ruins of this “Pictish tower”
  may have been occupied and utilised by Earl Rögnvald’s men, as we know
  that the similar tower of Mousa, in Shetland, was on different
  occasions, one of which is narrated in chap. xcii. of this same Saga.

Footnote 352:

  This incident bears a remarkable similarity to that related in chap.
  lxvi.

Footnote 353:

  It is curious that Cæsar has described the ancient Britons as
  observing in his time the same custom of shaving the lower part of the
  chin, and wearing the hair long on the upper lip.

Footnote 354:

  Borgarfiord seems here to be a misreading for Breidafiord (the Moray
  Firth), unless we suppose that there was another Borgarfiord besides
  the one in Shetland. Jonæus has _nordr_ instead of _sudr_, thus making
  Swein sail north to Borgarfiord, which in this case would be in
  Shetland. But it is hardly probable that he would have taken Shetland
  in his route from Orkney to the coast of Moray.

Footnote 355:

  Dúfeyrar must have been situated on the sandy shore of the parish of
  Duffus, on the Moray coast, _eyri_ signifying a spit of sand. It has
  been supposed, with some degree of probability, that Burghead is the
  place here meant.

Footnote 356:

  Ekkialsbakki, probably for Atjoklsbakki. (See note on p. 107.)

Footnote 357:

  Hjalmundal, Strath Helmsdale, or Strath Ulli, which runs up along the
  south side of the Ord, the mountain chain separating Caithness from
  Sutherland. The expression “near the middle of Sutherland” must mean
  that Swein came up through the central or inland region of the
  country, and thus came down into Strath Helmsdale, a long way from the
  coast, or “near the middle of the land.”

Footnote 358:

  _Ines_ in Jonæus; it has not been identified.

Footnote 359:

  Probably Lundy Island, in the Bristol Channel.

Footnote 360:

  Syllingar, the Scilly Islands. There was an ecclesiastical settlement
  there in Olaf Tryggvason’s time. It was in the Scilly Islands that he
  was baptized, and embraced the faith which he afterwards propagated
  with the strong hand both in his own kingdom and in Orkney.

Footnote 361:

  _Lúdr._—This same signal was used by the army of the Bœndr at the
  battle of Stiklestad (Flateyjarbók, ii. 352). The signal-horn used at
  the present day by the Shetland fishermen still retains the ancient
  name, “the ludr-horn.”

Footnote 362:

  _Clavis Rhythmica_, apparently a kind of rhyming dictionary or
  repertory of versification. Torfæus states that this joint production
  of Earl Rögnvald and Hall, Ragna’s son, is still extant in the library
  at Upsala.

Footnote 363:

  From the description of Lambaborg, and its situation with regard to
  the coast and the river at Freswick, it seems to have been the
  fortalice now called Bucholly Castle, from a Mowat of Bucholly who
  possessed it in the 17th century, and by whom it was partially
  rebuilt.

Footnote 364:

  Probably now represented by Duffus in Moray.

Footnote 365:

  This passage supplies the name of a prior of the monastery of May, not
  otherwise on record. (See records of the Priory of the Isle of May,
  issued by the Soc. Antiq. Scot. 1868).

Footnote 366:

  See p. 123.

Footnote 367:

  See chap. lxxiv.

Footnote 368:

  The Stockholm translation of the Saga has “in Vigr,” instead of “in
  the Islands.”

Footnote 369:

  In the Saga of Hakon Hakonson it is stated that Kolbein Hruga’s castle
  was on the island of Vigr, now Weir. It was to this stronghold that
  Snækoll Gunnason fled when he had slain Earl John (son of Harald
  Maddadson), the last of the Norse Earls of Orkney, in A.D. 1232; and
  the Saga states that the castle was so strong that it resisted all the
  efforts of the Earl’s friends to take it. In 1529 we learn from Jo.
  Ben that the ruins were still visible. Barry describes it as a small
  square tower, 15 feet square inside, and the walls 7 feet thick,
  strongly built with large stones, well cemented with lime. It is now a
  green mound, like the older Pictish towers; but to this day among the
  peasantry of the locality the mound bears the name of _Cobbie Row’s_
  (Kolbein Hruga’s) Castle.

Footnote 370:

  See note on p. 84.

Footnote 371:

  Probably in the body-guard of the Greek Emperor, which, the Byzantine
  historians of the period inform us, was composed of natives of the
  remote north, whom they call Varangians. The name Varangi first
  appears with them in the year 935, but they are said to have served of
  old in the body-guard, and to have come partly from Thule and partly
  from England. In the Saga of Harald Hardradi his exploits during his
  sojourn in the East are minutely detailed, and it is recorded that he
  became chief of the Værings, who were at that time in the Imperial
  service. For several centuries these mercenaries in the pay of the
  Emperors were renowned for their bravery, discipline, and fidelity.
  After the Norman conquest of England, a body of Anglo-Saxon youth,
  under Siward of Gloucester, choosing exile rather than the ignominy of
  submission to the conquerors, went to Constantinople, and enrolled
  themselves among the Værings. So many followed them that a mixture of
  Danish and Saxon became the official language of the guards of the
  Imperial Palace. Hoards of Eastern coins and ornaments are almost
  annually discovered in Norway and Sweden, and occasionally in Orkney
  and the North of Scotland. The museum of Stockholm possesses a
  collection of more than 20,000 Cufic coins found in Sweden, dating
  from the close of the 8th to the end of the 10th century, and vast
  quantities of those silver ornaments of peculiar forms and style of
  workmanship, which are also believed to have been brought from the
  East, partly by trade and partly by the returning Værings.

Footnote 372:

  The scene of the shipwreck seems to have been near Gulberwick.

Footnote 373:

  The MS. translation at Stockholm reads “two Icelanders.”

Footnote 374:

  Having studied probably at the University of Paris. Schröder gives the
  names of several Swedish students at the University of Paris as early
  as 1275. (De Universitate Parisiensi: Joh. Hen. Schröder.)

Footnote 375:

  Valland, probably for Gaul-land, the Norse name for the west coast of
  France.

Footnote 376:

  Verbon has not been identified.

Footnote 377:

  Galicialand, the modern Galicia, the north-west corner of Spain.

Footnote 378:

  Heathen Spainland must refer to the provinces then in possession of
  the Moors. The Saga of Sigurd the Jorsala-farer says that when he
  visited Lisbon, four years after the fall of King Magnus Barelegs
  (circa A.D. 1107), “there lies the division between Christian Spain
  and heathen Spain, and all the districts that lie west of the city are
  occupied by heathens”—meaning Moslems.

Footnote 379:

  Njörfasund, the Straits of Gibraltar.

Footnote 380:

  Serkland, or Saracen land—the north coast of Africa.

Footnote 381:

  _Dromones_, originally used for long and swift ships, was in later
  times applied to the larger ships of war (Du Cange _sub voce_). In the
  early French romances it appears as “Dromons,” and “Dromont.” Matthew
  Paris, in his account of the crusading expedition of Richard I. of
  England (A.D. 1191) notices the capture of a Saracen ship—“navis
  permaxima quam Drómundam appellant.”—_Hist. Angl._ vol. ii. p. 23,
  Rolls Ed.

Footnote 382:

  The tying of knots at the Jordan is also alluded to in the saga of
  Sigurd the Jorsala-farer. King Sigurd and his brother Eystein are
  “comparing each other’s exploits,” and Sigurd says:—“I went to
  Palestine, and I came to Apulia, but I did not see you there, brother.
  I went all the way to Jordan, where our Lord was baptized, and swam
  across the river; but I did not see thee there. On the edge of the
  river-bank there was a bush of willows, and there I twisted a knot of
  willows, which is waiting thee there; for I said this knot thou
  shouldst untie, and fulfil the vow, brother, that is bound up in it.”
  The tying of knots seems also to have had another meaning covertly
  alluded to in the stanzas.—(See the story of Gunnhild and Hrut in the
  Njáls Saga, p. 18.)

Footnote 383:

  This seems to be no place-name, but a name formed, as the Turks formed
  the name Istambol, from hearing the Greeks constantly talking of going
  “εις την πολιν”—“to the city,” meaning Constantinople.

Footnote 384:

  Probably the promontory of Sigeum, at the mouth of the Dardanelles. It
  might be called Ægisness, from its being at the entrance to the Ægean
  Sea. It is called Engilsness in the saga of “King Sigurd the
  Jorsala-farer,” and it is stated that Sigurd’s fleet also lay here for
  a fortnight waiting a side-wind, that they might show off their sails
  (which they had stitched over with silks) as they passed up to
  Constantinople. There was, however, a town called Ægos, at the mouth
  of a stream of the same name, near the northern end of the
  Dardanelles, a little below the modern Gallipoli.

Footnote 385:

  See note at p. 127.

Footnote 386:

  Manuel I., successor of John Comnenus, who reigned from 1143 to 1180.

Footnote 387:

  Dýraksborg must be Durazzo, the ancient Dyrachium, a seaport in
  Albania, on the Adriatic, opposite to Brundusium in Italy.

Footnote 388:

  Pull, the ancient Apulia or Puglia, in Italy, on the opposite shore of
  the Adriatic from Dyrachium. Apulia had been under the dominion of its
  Norman dukes from the middle of the eleventh century, and this may
  have been the reason why the route homewards through Apulia was chosen
  both by Sigurd the Jorsala-farer and Earl Rögnvald.

Footnote 389:

  Hákon Herdabreid (the broad-shouldered) became King in 1161. (For an
  account of his death, and that of King Ingi and Gregorius Dagson, see
  the sagas of the sons of Harald Gilli and Hákon Herdabreid, in the
  Heimskringla.)

Footnote 390:

  Near Bergen.

Footnote 391:

  Viken, in the south of Norway.

Footnote 392:

  Bishop’s-tongues, a district lying between three rivers in the south
  of Iceland, also mentioned in the Njáls Saga.

Footnote 393:

  See note on p. 21.

Footnote 394:

  One of the MS. copies of the saga has “Rögnvaldzeyiar.”

Footnote 395:

  Harald Hardradi, son of Sigurd Syr, who was slain in the battle of
  Stamford Bridge. See p. 47.

Footnote 396:

  See the account of her elopement with Earl Erlend Ungi in chap. xcii.,
  and of her relations with Gunni, Olaf’s son, chap. lxxxvii.

Footnote 397:

  This was Malcolm the Maiden, the grandson, and not the son, of King
  David I.

Footnote 398:

  Malcolm the Maiden.

Footnote 399:

  Malcolm the Maiden was twelve years old when he came to the throne.
  Perhaps the Saga-writer meant that he had then been nine winters king.

Footnote 400:

  The Mull of Deerness, or Moulhead of Deerness, as it is called in the
  maps, in the north-east of the Mainland, Orkney.

Footnote 401:

  Skeggbjarnarstad was probably a homestead on Skebro Head, in Rousay.
  The old form of Skebro Head might be Skeggbjarnarhöfdi.

Footnote 402:

  Hofsness, probably Huipness, the most northerly point of Stronsay.

Footnote 403:

  Kjarekstad.—Munch identifies this place with the modern Karston or
  Careston, which lies on the inlet leading to the Loch of Stennis, a
  little to the north-east of Stromness. But this would make Arni,
  Rafn’s son, run a good ten miles without once remembering that he had
  his shield on his shoulder until it stuck in the door at Kirkwall. If
  this Kjarekstad be not the same with Knarrarstad at Scapa, which was
  Earl Rögnvald’s homestead (see p. 113), and might be the castle here
  spoken of, there is a Carness near Kirkwall (in old maps Carisness)
  which may be more readily supposed to be the Kjarekstad from which
  Arni ran than Careston near Stromness.

Footnote 404:

  Munch says of this passage that the text reads, very improperly,
  “Gáreksey” for “Grimsey.” Hafnarvag he identifies with the Medalland’s
  hofn of Hakon Hakonson’s saga, which is the “Midland Harbour” lying
  between the Holm of Houston and the Mainland on the south side of
  Orphir. The name Hafnarvag, however, simply signifies a landing-place
  in a voe or inlet, and might more appropriately be applied to some
  place near the head of the inlet immediately opposite Grimsey, which
  goes up to the Loch of Stennis. If Harald and his men landed at
  “Midland Harbour,” they took the longest land route to walk to Firth;
  if they landed near the head of the inlet above mentioned, they chose
  the shortest land route.

Footnote 405:

  The word Orkahaug is only known to occur twice—once here, and once in
  one of the Runic inscriptions on the walls of the chamber of Maeshow.
  Here it is given merely as the name of the place where Earl Harald and
  his men had a Yule-tide carouse, which disabled two of them from
  proceeding on their journey, so that they failed in surprising Earl
  Erlend at his Yule feast. In the inscription in the chamber of Maeshow
  it appears as the name of the burial-mound which was broken into by
  the Jorsala-farers in search of treasure. There seems to be little
  doubt that this name “Orkahaug” was the name by which the Maeshow was
  then known. The Orkahaug of the text must either mean the actual “how”
  itself, or a homestead near it which was named from it. There is an
  Orkhill (Orquill) not very far from Maeshow, and there was another
  Orkhill near Knarstane, Scapa, which is called Orquile in “the coppie
  of my Lord Sinclairis Rentale that deit at Flowdin.” No other
  Orkahaug, however, is known. (See under Maeshow in the Introduction.)

Footnote 406:

  The castle at Freswick, elsewhere called Lambaborg (see p. 122).

Footnote 407:

  The mouth of the burn of Freswick.

Footnote 408:

  Moseyjar-borg, the burg or castle on the little island of Mousa, in
  Shetland. This curious structure is the best preserved example of the
  old Celtic strongholds, or “Pictish towers,” which were so thickly
  planted over the northern and western districts of Scotland, and
  specially in those districts exposed to the ravages of the Northmen.
  We learn from the Saga of Egill Skalagrimson that fully two centuries
  before the event here narrated Mousa had been occupied in a precisely
  similar manner by a couple who fled from Norway, and after celebrating
  their marriage in the deserted burg, lived in it for a whole winter.
  (See under Mousa in the Introduction.)

Footnote 409:

  The Moray Firth.

Footnote 410:

  Bly-holmar (lead islands) must refer to a group of islands not far to
  the south of Berwick, probably the Fern Islands.

Footnote 411:

  Mosey, the Isle of May.

Footnote 412:

  Off Sumburgh Head, now called Sumburgh Roost.

Footnote 413:

  Beruvik, probably the inlet at the mouth of the Berriedale water, on
  the north side of the Ord of Caithness, where there is an old tower
  called Berriedale Castle. (See note at p. 18.)

Footnote 414:

  This was probably the castle which was destroyed by King William the
  Lion in the end of the twelfth century, when he sent his troops
  against Earl Harald “to Turseha,” and destroyed the Earl’s residence
  there.

Footnote 415:

  This is evidently a mistake in the text for Rögnvaldsey, or South
  Ronaldsay. In the MS. the contraction R.ey is used both for Rínarsey
  and Rögnvaldsey.

Footnote 416:

  Vidivag, the voe or creek of the beacon; now Widewall, in South
  Ronaldsay.

Footnote 417:

  Bardvik, the bay beside Barth Head; now Burswick, in South Ronaldsay.

Footnote 418:

  Strandhögg, strand-hewing, or victualling the ships of a viking
  squadron, by driving cattle to the shore, and killing them there.

Footnote 419:

  Ru Stoer in Assynt, on the west coast of Sutherlandshire.

Footnote 420:

  Walls, in the Island of Hoy, Orkney.

Footnote 421:

  Knarston, at Scapa, in the Mainland of Orkney. (See note at p. 113.)

Footnote 422:

  Paplay, in Mainland, where Hákon Karl, the brother of Earl Magnus the
  Holy, had his residence. (See p. 96.)

Footnote 423:

  Sandwick, in Deerness.

Footnote 424:

  The Iceland Annals place the fall of Earl Erlend in A.D. 1154.

Footnote 425:

  See p. 74.

Footnote 426:

  None of these men are again mentioned in the Saga.

Footnote 427:

  In the “Coppie of my Lord Sinclaire’s Rentale, that deit at Flowdin,”
  dating between 1497 and 1503, there is a Tyngwale in Rendale, set to
  John Selatter. The name still remains, but there is no other trace of
  an Orkney thing-stead in the Islands. (See p. 61.)

Footnote 428:

  Mackaile and Sir Robert Sibbald both notice the existence of white
  hares in the hill of Hoy. Low, in his “Fauna Orcadensis,” states that
  they did not exist in his day; and he adds, “nor is there a hare of
  any kind to be found in the Orkneys.”

Footnote 429:

  Cave Isle—now Eller Holm, a small island between Shapinsay and the
  Mainland of Orkney.

Footnote 430:

  This seems to indicate that there was an ecclesiastical settlement on
  Eller Holm. Possibly it may have been the “isle Elon” referred to in
  the stanza made by Earl Rögnvald on the occasion of the singular
  apparition of the sixteen shaven crowns described in chap. lxvi. It is
  suggestive of this that Fordun gives the name of this island as
  Helene-holm instead of Eller Holm. (See note, chap. lxvi.)

Footnote 431:

  Völuness has not been identified.

Footnote 432:

  This must be Barswick, near Barthhead, in South Ronaldsay, as it is
  afterwards stated that from this headland Rögnvald and Swein saw Earl
  Harald’s ship coming across the Firth from Caithness to Walls.

Footnote 433:

  In the text it is “Hrólfsey to R(inans)ey”—Rousay to North Ronaldsay,
  but Munch’s reading of the passage seems to be the true one. (See the
  next chapter.)

Footnote 434:

  The Mainland of Orkney. This shows that in all likelihood it is
  Hrossey that is meant where the text has Hrólfsey at the beginning of
  the previous chapter.

Footnote 435:

  Probably Rapness, in the south-east of the island of Westray.

Footnote 436:

  It does not appear whether this is the Hákon Karl who lived at Papuli
  or not.

Footnote 437:

  St. Mary’s, the largest of the Scilly Isles, called Syllingar in the
  Sagas.

Footnote 438:

  This was the famous Somerled, styled by the Chronicle of Man “Regulus
  Herergaidel”—ruler of Argyle. This chronicle also adds the information
  that his marriage with Ragnhild was the cause of the ruin of the
  monarchy of the Isles. Although the Saga here makes Swein, Asleif’s
  son, kill Somerled about the year A.D. 1159, we learn from the more
  trustworthy sources of Fordun and the Chron. de Mailros that Somerled
  was killed at Renfrew on the 1st January 1164, having landed there
  with a fleet of 160 galleys in the attempt to make a conquest of
  Scotland. He had given his sister in marriage to Wimund, ex-bishop,
  _alias_ Malcolm M’Heth, whom the Saga calls Earl of Moray. After the
  unsuccessful termination of Malcolm M’Heth’s attempt to gain
  possession of the crown of Scotland, his brother-in-law, Somerled,
  seems to have continued the hostilities against King David, and to
  have joined the party against Malcolm IV. when the attempt was made to
  place the “Boy of Egremont” on the throne. (See Fordun Skene’s ed.)
  II. 250, and Munch, _Chron. Man._ p. 80.

Footnote 439:

  Dugald, Reginald, and Angus; from Reginald sprang the Macrories,
  Macdougalls, and Macdonalds of the Isles.

Footnote 440:

  This is the Firth of Forth in chapter lxxvii. Here it evidently refers
  to one of the sea-lochs on the west coast, and may probably be Loch
  Gleann Dubh, the inner portion of Kyle Scow. At least the Norse name
  “Dark Fiord,” and the Gaelic “Loch of the Dark Glen,” are suggestively
  similar, and both equally descriptive of the upper part of the Kyle.

Footnote 441:

  In reference to this passage, Jonæus, in his edition of the Saga
  (Hafniæ, 1780), says, that what is of the greatest moment is the fact
  which it points out, that at this date (circa 1158) there were
  reindeer in Scotland. In his Latin version of the original he
  translates the phrase “_at veida rauddyri edr hreina_” as “_feras
  rubras et rangiferos venari_,” and has no doubt or hesitancy about the
  matter. It is established by geological evidence that the reindeer was
  widely distributed in Great Britain in post-glacial times, although
  the instances of its occurrence within the human period, and in
  association with the remains of man, have been comparatively rare.
  Recently, however, evidence has been supplied by excavations in the
  ruins of the brochs, or “Pictish towers,” of the north of Scotland,
  which fully corroborates the statement of the Saga that the reindeer
  was actually hunted and eaten by the later occupants of these
  structures, their latest occupation on record being an occasional one
  by the Norsemen. In the refuse-heaps of several of these towers, the
  horns of the reindeer have been found, in some instances cut and sawn
  as if to be utilised for artificial purposes; while in other cases it
  is evident that the animals must have been killed when the horns were
  in the velvet. It is also significant that the reindeer moss
  (_Cladonia rangiferina_) still grows abundantly in Caithness. The
  question is very fully and ably discussed in a paper on “The Reindeer
  in Scotland,” by Dr. J. A. Smith, in the eighth volume of the
  Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland.

Footnote 442:

  It is plain from the original that some words are here omitted from
  the text. One of the MS. copies of the Saga has had the additional
  words, which are thus rendered in the Danish translation preserved at
  Stockholm, “_Der som vaar noget_ erg, _det kalde vi setter_,” etc.
  “There were there some shielings (erg), which we call setter; and
  there they took up their quarters for the night.” What is remarkable
  about this passage is that the Gaelic word for a shieling, _Airidh_,
  given phonetically by the old Norse saga-writer as “erg,” is glossed
  in the Danish translation by the word “setter”—summer pasturing-place,
  where rude huts were erected for temporary occupation. The word
  setter, which is common in the place-names of Caithness and the
  Northern Isles, is to this day understood by the inhabitants in the
  same sense, although the custom of sending the cattle to the
  hill-pastures in summer, and living in “shielings,” has now ceased, on
  the mainland at least. (See also the note on “Asgrim’s ærgin,” p.
  187.)

Footnote 443:

  A Norwegian ell is half a yard. The leap was thus four yards and a
  half.

Footnote 444:

  Kalfadalsá, the Kalfadal’s stream, is the Burn of Calder, which,
  issuing from the Loch of Calder, falls into the Thurso water. The
  situation of Kalfadal, a valley running up from the valley of the
  Thurso water towards Forss, is exactly that of the valley of Calder.

Footnote 445:

  The word _ærgin_ is not Norse. It is, however, a Norse corruption of
  the Gaelic word for a shieling—_airidh_, plur. _aridhean_, which
  enters into the composition of many of the place-names in
  Caithness—_e.g._ Halsary, Dorrery, Shurrery, Blingery, etc. Asgrim’s
  _ærgin_ is still recognisable in the modern Askary or Assary, near the
  north end of the Loch of Calder. It is curious to find thus
  incidentally in the Saga an indication of the blending of the
  folk-speech of the time, and to find also in the modern names of Norn
  Calder and Scotscalder a record (preserved on the spot) of the time
  when one portion of the dale was possessed by the Norsemen and another
  by the natives. Passing from Calder towards the coast the place-names
  are mostly Norse; and passing from Calder in the opposite direction
  towards the uplands, the place-names are almost entirely Gaelic.

Footnote 446:

  The feast of the Assumption of St. Mary, or the 15th August. The
  Iceland Annals give 1158 as the year of Rögnvald’s death.

Footnote 447:

  Earl Rögnvald was canonised A.D. 1192.

Footnote 448:

  Skrud, a general term for fine cloth and costly stuffs.

Footnote 449:

  After the divorce of his first wife Afreka. (See chap. cix.)

Footnote 450:

  The Celtic form of her name is Gormlath.

Footnote 451:

  This “Malcolm, Earl of Moray,” has a curious history. He appears first
  as Wimund, a monk of Savigny, and priest in the Isle of Skye.
  Afterwards he became Bishop of Man, and subsequently appeared in the
  character of a pretender to the Scottish crown, giving himself out to
  be Malcolm MacHeth, son of that Angus MacHeth who was defeated by King
  David, and slain at Strickathro A.D. 1130. Assisted by Somerled of
  Argyle and by this alliance with the Earl of Orkney, he ravaged the
  western coasts of Scotland, until he was captured by King David, and
  confined in the Castle of Roxburgh in 1134. He was released by Malcolm
  the Maiden after the death of King David, and received from the young
  king the sovereignty of a portion of the ancient kingdom of Cumbria.
  His tyranny was such that his subjects revolted, took him prisoner,
  put out his eyes, and confined him in the monastery of Bellaland
  (Byland), in Yorkshire. (Munch, _Chron. Man._ p. 80.)

Footnote 452:

  Thorfinn, the son of Earl Harald, appears on record about the year
  A.D. 1165. In the Chartulary of Scone there is a document by “Harald,
  Earl of Orkney, Hetland, and Cataness,” granting to the monks of Scone
  a mark of silver to be paid annually by himself, his son Turphin, and
  their heirs.—_Lib. Eccles. de Scone_, p. 37. Thorfinn died in prison
  in Roxburgh Castle, after being mutilated by King William the Lion, to
  whom he had been given as a hostage for his father.

Footnote 453:

  William the Lion.

Footnote 454:

  The “Fagrskinna” has (p. 148) “er fell i Vik”—he fell at Wick; but
  there is nothing to fix the locality of this battle more definitely.
  The tradition of the district points to Clairdon Hill, between Murkle
  and Thurso, as the scene of the encounter. The church which is here
  said to have been erected on the spot where Harald fell, and which is
  spoken of as standing there when the Saga was written, is not now in
  existence. The ruins of a chapel, which was traditionally believed to
  mark the spot, were removed when the ground was brought under
  cultivation by the late Sir John Sinclair. A remonstrance by the late
  Rev. Mr. Pope, of Reay, seems to have had the effect of causing the
  erection of an edifice (now used as the tomb of the Sinclair family)
  over the place where an old chapel stood. It is now known locally as
  “Harold’s Tower.” Large quantities of human bones, and several of the
  peculiarly-shaped Norse swords which Mr. Pope describes as “odd
  machines resembling ploughshares, all iron,” have been dug up in the
  neighbourhood.

Footnote 455:

  The Bishop advised the people to allow him first to speak with the
  Earl, in the hope that he would be able to mollify him.

Footnote 456:

  This seems to imply that it was at the grave of the holy Tröllhæna
  that the Bishop received his sight. Tröllhæna seems to be the Celtic
  St. Triduana or St. Tredwell, who, according to her legendary history,
  came from Achaia with St. Regulus in the fourth century. Being of
  extraordinary beauty, she was solicited by a Gallic prince, and to put
  an end to his solicitations she cut out both her eyes, and sent them
  to him skewered on a twig. Sir David Lindsay alludes to this:—

                 “Sanct Tredwall, als, there may be sene,
                  Quhilk on ane prick hes baith her ene.”

  She died at Restalrig, near Edinburgh, and her tomb there continued,
  so late as Lindsay’s time, to be a resort of pilgrims who came to
  “mend their ene.” There is a chapel dedicated to St. Tredwell in the
  island of Papa Westray, which Munch considers likely to have been
  erected by Celtic ecclesiastics previous to the Norse invasion. There
  was another chapel dedicated to her at Kintradwell, in
  Sutherlandshire, where she is known as St. Trullen; but there is now
  no trace of a St. Tredwell’s chapel in Caithness.

Footnote 457:

  The letter of Pope Innocent to the Bishop of Orkney, prescribing the
  penance to be performed by the man Lomberd, who cut out the Bishop’s
  tongue, gives the additional information that when the Earl’s men took
  the “borg” they killed almost all that were in it. (See the
  Introduction.) The “borg,” or castle, at Scrabster, may have been an
  earlier building on the site of the “Bishop’s Castle,” an old
  fortalice on the cliff near the present hamlet of Scrabster, or it may
  have been the ruins of one of the still older Pictish towers, not far
  off, which the Caithnessmen may have occupied for the occasion as a
  defensible position.

Footnote 458:

  Eysteinsdal is not now represented in the topography of the district.

Footnote 459:

  The battle of Floruvogar took place in 1194, according to the Iceland
  Annals appended to the Flateyjarbók.

Footnote 460:

  Shetland then passed into the immediate possession of the Crown of
  Norway. Its revenues were granted by King Hakon Magnusson, in 1312-19,
  to the Mary-kirk in Osloe (Christiania) for the completion of the
  fabric, with the proviso that then they should revert to the crown.

Footnote 461:

  According to the Iceland Annals of the Flateyjarbók, King Ingi Bardson
  “took the kingdom” in 1204, and Harald Maddadson died in 1206.

Footnote 462:

  The death of Hakon Galinn took place in the year 1214, according to
  the Annals appended to the Flateyjarbók.

Footnote 463:

  A spann = 24 marks, or 12 lbs. Scottish.—_Balfour’s Odal Rights_, p.
  99.

Footnote 464:

  Halkirk, in the Thurso valley.

Footnote 465:

  The Icelandic Annals place the burning of Bishop Adam in the year
  1222, and add that the King of Scots caused the hands and feet to be
  hewn off eighty men who had been concerned in the Bishop’s burning.
  Among the documents found in the King’s treasury at Edinburgh in 1282
  (and subsequently lost) was one entitled: “A quit-claiming of the
  lands of the Bondi of Caithness for the slaughter of the Bishop.” A
  bull of Pope Honorius, dated 23d January 1223, and addressed to the
  Bishops of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Dunkeld, and Dunblane, speaks in
  terms of high commendation of King Alexander’s zealous desire to
  avenge such an unheard-of crime as the burning of a bishop, and
  thoroughly corroborates the Saga account of the manner of Adam’s
  death, stating that these “wolves” and “demons,” having stripped their
  Bishop of his garments, stoned him, mortally wounded him with an axe,
  and finally burned him in his own kitchen. (Theiner’s _Vetera
  Monumenta_, p. 21.)

Footnote 466:

  See note at p. 107.

Footnote 467:

  The Mainland of Orkney.

Footnote 468:

  Haugaheith, now Hoxa, a peninsula on the north-west side of South
  Ronaldsay, on which there are still several ancient grave-mounds, and
  one mound larger than the rest, which has been ascertained to cover
  the ruins of a Pictish tower. The grave-mound of Earl Thorfinn has not
  been identified, but Low mentions that in his time there was a
  tradition that the son of a King of Norway had been buried in the How
  (_haug_) of Hoxa (_Haugs-heith_).

Footnote 469:

  Steinsness, in Hrossey, is the “ness” or promontory at the Loch of
  Stennis on the Mainland of Orkney, now so well known as the site of
  the “standing stones of Stennis.” The Norsemen evidently named it
  Steinsness from the stone circles and monoliths which stood on it when
  they first knew it. (See the Introduction, under “Stennis.”)

Footnote 470:

  There is a place at Stennis called Havard’s-teigr by the country
  people to the present day; _teigr_ meaning an individual’s share of
  the tún-land.

Footnote 471:

  Nithing—cowardly miscreant.

Footnote 472:

  The name Magbiód is suggestive of Macbeth, but the date is too early
  for Macbeth Mac-Finlay.

Footnote 473:

  Audna is probably the Irish name _Eithne_. Kiarval, her father, is the
  Cearbhal or Carrol of the Irish Annals, who was King of Dublin
  872-887. He is mentioned in the opening chapter of the Landnamabók as
  King of Dublin when Harald Harfagri ruled in Norway and Sigurd was
  Earl of the Orkneys. The two branches of the Hy Ivar, Kings of Dublin
  and Limerick, were the descendants of Ivar the Boneless, son of Ragnar
  Lodbrok. (See War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill, App. pp. 271, 299.)




                                -------




                                THE END.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                    88 PRINCES STREET,
                                                    Edinburgh, May 1873.

                          EDMONSTON & DOUGLAS’

                             LIST OF WORKS.

                                -------

The Culture and Discipline of the Mind, and other Essays. By JOHN
  ABERCROMBIE, M.D. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

Wanderings of a Naturalist in India, The Western Himalayas, and
  Cashmere. By DR. A. L. ADAMS of the 22d Regiment. 8vo, with
  Illustrations, price 10s. 6d.

  “The author need be under no apprehension of wearying his readers....
  He prominently combines the sportsman with the naturalist.”—Sporting
  Review.

Notes of a Naturalist in the Nile Valley and Malta.

  By ANDREW LEITH ADAMS. Author of ‘Wanderings of a Naturalist in
  India.’ Crown 8vo, with Illustrations, price 15s.

  “Most attractively instructive to the general reader.”—Bell’s
  Messenger.

The Orkneyinga Saga.

  Edited, with Notes and Introduction, by JOSEPH ANDERSON, Keeper of the
  National Museum of the Antiquaries of Scotland. 1 vol. demy 8vo. [In
  the press.

Alexandra Feodorowna, late Empress of Russia.

  By A. TH. VON GRIMM, translated by LADY WALLACE. 2 vols. 8vo, with
  Portraits, price 21s.

  “Contains an amount of information concerning Russian affairs and
  Russian society.”—Morning Post.

Always in the Way.

  By the author of ‘The Tommiebeg Shootings.’ 12mo, price 1s. 6d.

Australian Beef and Mutton, and how to make the best of them. By Miss C.
  L. H. DEMPSTER. Sewed, price 1d.

The Malformations, Diseases, and Injuries of the Fingers and Toes, and
  their Surgical Treatment. By THOMAS ANNANDALE, F.R.C.S. 8vo, with
  Illustrations, price 10s. 6d.

Odal Rights and Feudal Wrongs.

  A Memorial for Orkney. By DAVID BALFOUR of Balfour and Trenaby. 8vo,
  price 6s.

Sermons by the late James Bannerman, D.D., Professor of Apologetics and
  Pastoral Theology, New College, Edinburgh. In 1 vol., extra fcap. 8vo,
  price 5s.

The Life, Character, and Writings of Benjamin Bell, F.R.C.S.E.,
  F.R.S.E., author of a ‘System of Surgery,’ and other Works. By his
  Grandson, BENJAMIN BELL, F.R.C.S.E. Fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

The Holy Grail. An Inquiry into the Origin and Signification of the
  Romances of the San Greäl. By Dr. F. G. BERGMANN. Fcap. 8vo, price 1s.
  6d.

  “Contains, in a short space, a carefully-expressed account of the
  romances of chivalry, which compose what has been called the Epic
  cycle of the San Greäl.”—Athenæum.

Homer and the Iliad.

  In Three Parts. By JOHN STUART BLACKIE, Professor of Greek in the
  University of Edinburgh. 4 vols. demy 8vo, price 42s.

  By the same Author.

Four Phases of Morals: Socrates, Aristotle, Christianity, and
  Utilitarianism. Lectures delivered before the Royal Institution,
  London. Fcap. 8vo, price 6s.

On Democracy.

  Sixth Edition, price 1s.

Musa Burschicosa.

  A Book of Songs for Students and University Men. Fcap. 8vo, price 2s.
  6d.

War Songs of the Germans, translated, with the Music, and Historical
  Illustrations of the Liberation War and the Rhine Boundary Question.
  Fcap. 8vo, price 2s. 6d. cloth, 2s. paper. Dedicated to Thomas
  Carlyle.

On Greek Pronunciation.

  Demy 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Political Tracts.

  NO. 1. GOVERNMENT. NO. 2. EDUCATION. Price 1s. each.

On Beauty.

  Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d.

Lyrical Poems.

  Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The New Picture Book. Recreative Instruction.

  Pictorial Lessons on Form, Comparison, and Number, for Children under
  Seven Years of Age. With Explanations by NICHOLAS BOHNY. Fifth
  Edition. 36 oblong folio coloured Illustrations. Price 7s. 6d.

The Home Life of Sir David Brewster.

  By his daughter, Mrs. GORDON. 2d Edition. Crown 8vo, price 6s.

  “With his own countrymen it is sure of a welcome, and to the savants
  of Europe, and of the New World, it will have a real and special
  interest of its own.”—Pall Mall Gazette.

France under Richelieu and Colbert.

  By J. H. BRIDGES, M.B. Small 8vo, price 8s. 6d.

Works by John Brown, M.D., F.R.S.E.

  LOCKE AND SYDENHAM. Extra fcap. 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

  HORÆ SUBSECIVÆ. Seventh Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

  LETTER TO THE REV. JOHN CAIRNS, D.D. Second Edition, crown 8vo, sewed,
  2s.

  ARTHUR H. HALLAM; Extracted from ‘Horæ Subsecivæ.’ Fcap. sewed, 2s.;
  cloth, 2s. 6d.

  RAB AND HIS FRIENDS; Extracted from ‘Horæ Subsecivæ.’ Forty-seventh
  thousand. Fcap. sewed, 6d.

  RAB AND HIS FRIENDS. Cheap Illustrated Edition. Square 18mo;
  ornamental wrapper, 1s.

  RAB AND HIS FRIENDS. With Illustrations by Sir George Harvey, R.S.A.,
  Sir J. Noel Paton, R.S.A., and J. B. New Edition, small quarto, cloth,
  price 3s. 6d.

  MARJORIE FLEMING: A Sketch. Fifteenth thousand. Fcap. sewed, 6d.

  OUR DOGS; Extracted from ‘Horæ Subsecivæ.’ Nineteenth thousand. Fcap.
  sewed, 6d.

  “WITH BRAINS, SIR;” Extracted from ‘Horæ Subsecivæ.’ Fcap. sewed, 6d.

  MINCHMOOR. Fcap. sewed, 6d.

  JEEMS THE DOORKEEPER: A Lay Sermon. Price 6d.

  THE ENTERKIN. Price 6d.

Memoirs of John Brown, D.D.

  By the REV. J. CAIRNS, D.D., Berwick, with Supplementary Chapter by
  his Son, JOHN BROWN, M.D. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 9s. 6d.

Select Hymns for Church and Home.

  By R. BROWN-BORTHWICK. 18mo, price 2s. 6d.

The Finger of God in the Disruption and the Christian

  Ministry, being the Opening and Closing Addresses delivered at the
  General Assembly of the Free Church of Scotland, May 1872, by CHARLES
  J. BROWN, D.D., Moderator. 8vo, price 1s.

The Biography of Samson

  Illustrated and Applied. By the REV. JOHN BRUCE, D.D., Minister of
  Free St. Andrew’s Church, Edinburgh. Second Edition. 18mo, cloth, 2s.

The Life of Gideon.

  By REV. JOHN BRUCE, D.D., Free St. Andrew’s Church, Edinburgh. 1 vol.
  fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

  “We commend this able and admirable volume to the cordial acceptance
  of our readers.”—Daily Review.

By the Loch and River Side.

  Forty Graphic Illustrations by a New Hand. Oblong folio, handsomely
  bound, 21s.

The De Oratore of Cicero.

  Translated by F. B. CALVERT, M.A. Crown 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

My Indian Journal,

  Containing descriptions of the principal Field Sports of India, with
  Notes on the Natural History and Habits of the Wild Animals of the
  Country. By COLONEL WALTER CAMPBELL, author of ‘The Old Forest
  Ranger.’ 8vo, with Illustrations, price 16s.

Popular Tales of the West Highlands, Orally Collected, with a
  translation by J. F. CAMPBELL, 4 vols. extra fcap. cloth, 32s.

Inaugural Address at Edinburgh,

  April 2, 1866, by THOMAS CARLYLE, on being Installed as Rector of the
  University there. Price 1s.

Carswell’s Gaelic Prayer Book.

  The Book of Common Prayer, commonly called John Knox’s Liturgy.
  Translated into Gaelic, A.D. 1567, by Mr. JOHN CARSWELL, Bishop of the
  Isles. Edited, with an English Translation, by THOMAS McLAUCHLAN,
  LL.D., Translator of the Book of the Dean of Lismore. 4to, half
  Roxburghe. Price 30s.

On the Constitution of Papal Conclaves.

  By W. C. CARTWRIGHT, M.P. Fcap. 8vo, price 6s. 6d.

  “A book which will, we believe, charm careful students of history,
  while it will dissipate much of the ignorance which in this country
  surrounds the subject.”—Spectator.

Gustave Bergenroth. A Memorial Sketch.

  By W. C. CARTWRIGHT, M.P. Author of ‘The Constitution of Papal
  Conclaves.’ Crown 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

  “To those who knew this accomplished student, Mr. Cartwright’s
  enthusiastic memoir will be very welcome.”—Standard.

Life and Works of Rev. Thomas Chalmers, D.D., LL.D.

  MEMOIRS OF THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS. By REV. W. HANNA, D.D., LL.D. 4
  vols., 8vo, cloth, £2 2s.

  —— Cheap Edition, 2 vols., crown 8vo, cloth, 12s.

  POSTHUMOUS WORKS, 9 vols., 8vo—

  Daily Scripture Readings, 3 vols., £1:11:6. Sabbath Scripture
  Readings, 2 vols., £1:1s. Sermons, 1 vol., 10s. 6d. Institutes of
  Theology, 2 vols., £1:1s. Prelections on Butler’s Analogy, etc., 1
  vol., 10s. 6d. Sabbath Scripture Readings. Cheap Edition, 2 vols.,
  crown 8vo, 10s. Daily Scripture Readings. Cheap Edition, 2 vols.,
  crown 8vo, 10s.

  ASTRONOMICAL DISCOURSES, 1s. COMMERCIAL DISCOURSES, 1s.

  SELECT WORKS, in 12 vols., crown 8vo, cloth, per vol., 6s.

  Lectures on the Romans, 2 vols. Sermons, 2 vols. Natural Theology,
  Lectures on Butler’s Analogy, etc., 1 vol. Christian Evidences,
  Lectures on Paley’s Evidences, etc., 1 vol. Institutes of Theology, 2
  vols. Political Economy; with Cognate Essays, 1 vol. Polity of a
  Nation, 1 vol. Church and College Establishments, 1 vol. Moral
  Philosophy, Introductory Essays, Index, etc., 1 vol.

Characteristics of Old Church Architecture, etc.,

  In the Mainland and Western Islands of Scotland. 4to, with
  Illustrations, price 25s.

Dainty Dishes.

  Receipts collected by LADY HARRIETT ST. CLAIR. New Edition, with many
  new Receipts. Crown 8vo. Price 5s.

    “Well worth buying, especially by that class of persons who, though
    their incomes are small, enjoy out-of-the-way and recherché
    delicacies.”—Times.

The Constitution Violated.

  An Essay by the Author of ‘The Memoir of John Grey of Dilston,’
  dedicated to the Working Men and Women of Great Britain. Crown 8vo,
  3s. 6d.

Country Life in Jamaica. 1 vol. fcap. 8vo. [Immediately.

Sir John Duke Coleridge.

  Inaugural Address at Edinburgh Philosophical Institution, Session
  1870-71. 8vo, price 1s.

Wild Men and Wild Beasts—Adventures in Camp and Jungle. By
  LIEUT.-COLONEL GORDON CUMMING. With Illustrations by Lieut.-Col.
  BAIGRIE and others. Second edition. Demy 4to, price 24s.

  Also, a Cheaper Edition, with Lithographic Illustrations. 8vo, price
  12s.

Notes on the Natural History of the Strait of Magellan and West Coast of
  Patagonia, made during the voyage of H.M.S. ‘Nassau’ in the years
  1866, 1867, 1868, and 1869. By ROBERT O. CUNNINGHAM, M.D., F.R.S.,
  Naturalist to the Expedition. With Maps and numerous Illustrations.
  8vo, price 15s.

    “There is a good deal of interesting and novel information in the
    present volume, and we can recommend it especially to those whose
    tastes lie in that direction.”—Standard.

The Annals of the University of Edinburgh.

  By ANDREW DALZEL, formerly Professor of Greek in the University of
  Edinburgh; with a Memoir of the Compiler, and Portrait after Raeburn.
  2 vols. demy 8vo, price 21s.

Gisli the Outlaw.

  From the Icelandic. By G. W. DASENT, D.C.L. Small 4to, with
  Illustrations, price 7s. 6d.

The Story of Burnt Njal;

  Or, Life in Iceland at the end of the Tenth Century. From the
  Icelandic of the Njals Saga. By GEORGE WEBBE DASENT, D.C.L. 2 vols.
  8vo, with Map and Plans, price 28s.

Select popular Tales from the Norse.

  For the use of Young People. By G. W. DASENT, D.C.L. New Edition, with
  Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Plates and Notes relating to some Special Features in Structures called
  Pyramids. By ST. JOHN VINCENT DAY, C.E., F.R.SS.A. Royal folio, price
  28s.

  By the same Author.

Papers on the Great Pyramid.

  8vo, price 4s.

Some Evidence as to the very early Use of Iron.

  8vo, sewed, price 2s. 6d.

The Law of Railways applicable to Scotland, with an Appendix of Statutes
  and Forms. By FRANCIS DEAS, M.A., LL.B., Advocate. 1 vol. Royal 8vo,
  price 38s.

On the Application of Sulphurous Acid Gas to the Prevention, Limitation,
  and Cure of Contagious Diseases. By JAMES DEWAR, M.D. Thirteenth
  edition, price 1s.

Rheumatism and Rheumatic Gout treated on Antiseptic Principles. By JAMES
  DEWAR, M.D. Price 1s.

Dick and I.

  Uniform with ‘Little Tales for Tiny Tots,’ with six Illustrations.
  Square 18mo, price 1s.

Memoir of Thomas Drummond, R.E., F.R.A.S., Under-Secretary to the
  Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 1835 to 1840. By JOHN F. M’LENNAN,
  Advocate. 8vo, price 15s.

    “A clear, compact, and well-written memoir of the best friend
    England ever gave to Ireland.”—Examiner.

Political Survey.

  By MOUNTSTUART E. GRANT DUFF, Member for the Elgin District of Burghs;
  Author of ‘Studies in European Politics,’ ‘A Glance over Europe,’ &c.
  &c. 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

    “In following up his ‘Studies in European Politics’ by the
    ‘Political Survey’ here before us, Mr. Grant Duff has given strong
    evidence of the wisdom of the choice made by the Ministry in
    appointing him Under-Secretary for India. In the space of about 240
    pages, he gives us the cream of the latest information about the
    internal politics of no less than forty-four different countries
    under four heads, according to their situation in Europe, Asia, and
    Africa, Northern and Central America, or South America.”—Pall Mall
    Gazette.

  By the same Author.

Elgin Speeches. 8vo, cloth, price 8s. 6d.

A Glance over Europe. Price 1s.

Address as Rector at the University of Aberdeen. Price 1s.

East India Financial Statement, 1869. Price 1s.

Remarks on the Present Political Situation. Price 1s.

Expedit—Laboremus. Price 1s.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Veterinary Medicines; their Actions and Uses.

  By FINLAY DUN. Fourth Edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo. [In the
  press.

Social Life in Former Days; Chiefly in the Province of Moray.
  Illustrated by letters and family papers. By E. DUNBAR DUNBAR, late
  Captain 21st Fusiliers. 2 vols. demy 8vo, price 19s. 6d.

Deep-Sea Soundings.

  COLLOQUIA PERIPATETICA. By the late JOHN DUNCAN, LL.D., Professor of
  Hebrew in the New College, Edinburgh; being Conversations in
  Philosophy, Theology, and Religion. Edited by Rev. W. Knight. Third
  Edition. I vol. fcap. 8vo. Price 3s. 6d.

    “Since these lectures were published there has appeared an
    exceedingly interesting volume, entitled ‘Colloquia Peripatetica,’
    by the late John Duncan, LL.D., Professor of Hebrew in the New
    College, Edinburgh. These Colloquies are reported by the Rev.
    William Knight, who seems to be admirably adapted for the task he
    has undertaken. His friend must have been a man of rare originality,
    varied culture, great vigour in expressing thoughts, which were
    worthy to be expressed and remembered.... The reader who shall give
    himself the benefit and gratification of studying this short volume
    (it will suggest more to him than many of ten times its size) will
    find that I have not been bribed to speak well of it by any praise
    which Dr. Duncan has bestowed on me. The only excuse for alluding to
    it is, that it contains the severest censure on my writings which
    they have ever incurred, though they have not been so unfortunate as
    to escape censure.... Against any ordinary criticism, even a writer
    who is naturally thin-skinned becomes by degrees tolerably hardened.
    One proceeding from a man of such learning and worth as Dr. Duncan I
    have thought it a duty to notice.”—Extract from Preface to ‘The
    Conscience.’ By the late Professor F. D. Maurice. Second Edition,
    1872.

Recollections of the late John Duncan, LL.D., Professor of Hebrew and
  Oriental Languages, New College, Edinburgh. By the REV. A. MOODY
  STUART. Extra fcap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Memoir of the late John Duncan, LL.D., Professor of Hebrew, New College,
  Edinburgh. By the REV. DAVID BROWN, D.D. Second edition, crown 8vo,
  cloth, price 6s.

    “Dr. Brown’s book must be read and re-read. We must therefore refer
    our thoughtful and inquiring readers to this discriminating and
    carefully wrought biography.”—Literary World.

Edmonston and Douglas’ Juvenile Library.

  Square 18mo, with Illustrations. 1s. each.

  DICK AND I.
  LITTLE TALES FOR TINY TOTS.
  BIRDS’ NEST STORIES.
  THE CHARITY BAZAAR.
  NELLY RIVERS’ GREAT RICHES.
  STORIES TOLD IN THE WOODS.

                             NEW NIGHT-CAPS.

        ⸫ Other volumes of this attractive series in preparation.

Karl’s Legacy.

  By the REV. J. W. EBSWORTH. 2 vols. ex. fcap. 8vo. Price 6s. 6d.

Charlie and Ernest; or, Play and Work.

  A Story of Hazlehurst School, with Four Illustrations by J. D. By M.
  BETHAM EDWARDS. Royal 16mo, 3s. 6d.

A Memoir of the Right Honourable Hugh Elliot.

  By his Granddaughter, the COUNTESS of MINTO. 8vo, price 12s.

    “Lady Minto produced a valuable memoir when she printed the
    substance of the work before us for private circulation in 1862. It
    now, in its completed shape, presents a full-length and striking
    portrait of a remarkable member of a remarkable race.”—Quarterly
    Review.

The Spiritual Order, and other Papers selected from the MSS. of the late
  THOMAS ERSKINE of Linlathen. Crown 8vo, cloth, price 5s.

    “It will for a few have a value which others will not the least
    understand. But all must recognise in it the utterance of a spirit
    profoundly penetrated with the sense of brotherhood, and with the
    claims of common humanity.”—Spectator.

  By the same Author.

The Unconditional Freeness of the Gospel.

  New Edition revised. 1 vol. fcap. 8vo. Price 3s. 6d.

The Purpose of God in the Creation of Man.

  Fcap. 8vo, sewed. Price 6d.

  A few Copies of the original editions of Works by the same Author are
  still for Sale.

An Essay on Faith. Fourth Edition, 12mo, 3s.

The Brazen Serpent; or, Life Coming through Death.

  Second Edition, 12mo, 3s.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Good Little Hearts.

  By AUNT FANNY. Author of the ‘Night-Cap Series.’ 4 vols., fancy
  covers, 1s. each; or cloth extra, 1s. 6d. each.

  Charity Bazaar.
  Birds’ Nest Stories.
  Nelly Rivers’ Great Riches.
  Stories Told in the Wood.

L’Histoire d’Angleterre. Par M. LAMÉ FLEURY. 18mo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

L’Histoire de France. Par M. LAMÉ FLEURY. New Edition, corrected to
  1873. 18mo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

Christianity viewed in some of its Leading Aspects.

  By REV. A. L. R. FOOTE, Author of ‘Incidents in the Life of our
  Saviour.’ Fcap. cloth, 3s.

Kalendars of Scottish Saints, with Personal Notices of those of Alba,
  etc. By ALEXANDER PENROSE FORBES, D.C.L., Bishop of Brechin. 1 vol.
  4to. Price £3: 3s. A few copies for sale on large paper, price £5: 15:
  6.

    “A truly valuable contribution to the archæology of
    Scotland.”—Guardian.

    “We must not forget to thank the author for the great amount of
    information he has put together, and for the labour he has bestowed
    on a work which can never be remunerative.”—Saturday Review.

The Deepening of the Spiritual Life.

  By A. P. FORBES, D.C.L., Bishop of Brechin. Third edition. 18mo,
  cloth, price 1s. 6d.; or paper covers, 1s.

Frost and Fire; Natural Engines, Tool-Marks, and Chips, with Sketches
  drawn at Home and Abroad by a Traveller. Re-issue, containing an
  additional Chapter. 2 vols. 8vo, with Maps and numerous Illustrations
  on Wood, price 21s.

    “A very Turner among books, in the originality and delicious
    freshness of its style, and the truth and delicacy of the
    descriptive portions. For some four-and-twenty years he has
    traversed half our northern hemisphere by the least frequented
    paths; and everywhere, with artistic and philosophic eye, has found
    something to describe—here in tiny trout-stream or fleecy cloud,
    there in lava-flow or ocean current, or in the works of nature’s
    giant sculptor—ice.”—Reader.

The Cat’s Pilgrimage.

  By J. A. FROUDE, M.A., late Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. With 7
  full page Illustrations by Mrs. BLACKBURN (J. B.) 4to, price 6s.

Gifts for Men. By X. H.

  1. The Gift of Repentance.
  2. The Gift of the Yoke.
  3. The Gift of the Holy Ghost.
  4. The Promise to the Elect.

                                                    Crown 8vo, price 6s.

    “There is hardly a living theologian who might not be proud to claim
    many of her thoughts as his own.”—Glasgow Herald.

Glimpses of Life in Victoria.

  By a Resident. 8vo, with Illustrations, price 12s.

    “Out of sight the best book about Australia that has come into our
    hands.”—British Quarterly.

The Gospel in Isaiah: being an Exposition of the 55th and 56th Chapters
  of the Book of his Prophecies. By JOHN GEMMEL, M.A., Fairlie. Ex.
  fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

Arthurian Localities: their Historical Origin, Chief Country, and
  Fingalian Relations, with a Map of Arthurian Scotland. By JOHN G. S.
  STUART GLENNIE, M.A. 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

Works by Margaret Maria Gordon (née Brewster).

  WORKERS. Fcap. 8vo, limp cloth, 1s.

  LADY ELINOR MORDAUNT; OR, SUNBEAMS IN THE CASTLE. Crown 8vo, cloth,
    9s.

  WORK; OR, PLENTY TO DO AND HOW TO DO IT. Thirty-fifth thousand. Fcap.
    8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

  LITTLE MILLIE AND HER FOUR PLACES. Cheap Edition. Fifty-third
    thousand. Limp cloth, 1s.

  SUNBEAMS IN THE COTTAGE; OR, WHAT WOMEN MAY DO. A narrative chiefly
    addressed to the Working Classes. Cheap Edition. Forty-third
    thousand. Limp cloth, 1s.

  PREVENTION; OR, AN APPEAL TO ECONOMY AND COMMON-SENSE. 8vo, 6d.

  THE WORD AND THE WORLD. Price 2d.

  LEAVES OF HEALING FOR THE SICK AND SORROWFUL. Fcap. 4to, cloth, 3s.
    6d. Cheap Edition, limp cloth, 2s.

  THE MOTHERLESS BOY; with an Illustration by J. Noel Paton, R.S.A.
    Cheap Edition, limp cloth, 1s.

    “Alike in manner and matter calculated to attract youthful
    attention, and to attract it by the best of all
    means—sympathy.”—Scotsman.

'Christopher North;' A Memoir of John Wilson, late Professor of Moral
Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. Compiled from Family Papers
and other sources, by his daughter, MRS. GORDON. Third Thousand. 2 vols.
crown 8vo, price 24s., with Portrait, and graphic Illustrations.

‘Mystifications.’

By Miss STIRLING GRAHAM. Fourth Edition. Edited by JOHN BROWN, M.D. With
Portrait of ‘Lady Pitlyal.’ Fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

Happiness and Utility as promoted by the Higher Education of Women. By SIR
ALEX. GRANT, Bart., Price 1s.

Grandmamma’s Lessons, or Little Trix.

A Story for Children. Square 18mo. [In the press.

Life of Father Lacordaire.

By DORA GREENWELL. Fcap. 8vo. Price 6s.

  “She has done a great service in bringing before the English public
  the career of a great man whose biography they might have refused to
  read if written by a Roman Catholic.”—Church Times.

Scenes from the Life of Jesus.

By SAMUEL GREG. Second Edition, enlarged. Ex. fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

  “One of the few theological works which can be heartily commended to
  all classes.”—Inverness Courier.

Arboriculture; or, A Practical Treatise on Raising and Managing Forest
Trees, and on the Profitable Extension of the Woods and Forests of Great
Britain. By JOHN GRIGOR, The Nurseries, Forres. 8vo, price 10s. 6d.

  “He is a writer whose authorship has this weighty recommendation, that
  he can support his theories by facts, and can point to lands, worth
  less than a shilling an acre when he found them, now covered with
  ornamental plantations, and yielding through them a revenue equal to
  that of the finest corn-land in the country.... His book has interest
  both for the adept and the novice, for the large proprietor and him
  that has but a nook or corner to plant out.”—Saturday Review.

  “Mr. Grigor’s practical information on all points on which an
  intending planter is interested is particularly good.... We have
  placed it on our shelves as a first-class book of reference on all
  points relating to Arboriculture; and we strongly recommend others to
  do the same.”—Farmer.

An Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, From the Introduction of
Christianity to the Present Time. By GEORGE GRUB, A.M. 4 vols. 8vo, 42s.

Chronicle of Gudrun;

A Story of the North Sea. From the mediæval German. By EMMA LETHERBROW.
With frontispiece by J. NOEL PATON, R.S.A. New Edition, price 5s.

Notes on the Early History of the Royal Scottish Academy.

By Sir GEORGE HARVEY, Kt., P.R.S.A. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

The Resurrection of the Dead.

By WILLIAM HANNA, D.D., LL.D., author of “The Last Day of our Lord’s
Passion,” etc. 1 vol. fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

The Wars of the Huguenots.

By REV. WILLIAM HANNA, D.D., LL.D. Ex. fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

The Life of our Lord.

By the REV. WILLIAM HANNA, D.D., LL.D. 6 vols., handsomely bound in
cloth extra, gilt edges, price 30s.

        Separate vols., cloth, extra gilt edges, price 5s. each.

    1. THE EARLIER YEARS OF OUR LORD. 8th Thousand.
    2. THE MINISTRY IN GALILEE. Second Edition.
    3. THE CLOSE OF THE MINISTRY. 6th Thousand.
    4. THE PASSION WEEK. 5th Thousand.
    5. THE LAST DAY OF OUR LORD’S PASSION. 47th Thousand.
    6. THE FORTY DAYS AFTER THE RESURRECTION. 9th Thousand.

The Guidman of Inglismill, and The Fairy Bride.

Legends of the North. With Glossary, etc. 4to, price 2s. 6d.

Heavenly Love and Earthly Echoes.

By a Glasgow Merchant. 4th Edition. 18mo, price 1s. 6d.

  “We have read this volume with unmingled satisfaction. We very
  cordially recommend it, as one much fitted to commend religion to the
  young, to cheer and help the tempted and desponding, and indeed to
  have a wholesome influence on the minds and hearts of all.”—Original
  Secession Magazine.

  “Fitted to be useful and heart-stirring to all who are in earnest in
  religion. We hope and believe it will reach many more
  editions.”—Christian Work.

Herminius.

A Romance. By I. E. S. Fcap. 8vo, price 6s.

Historians of Scotland.

Price to Non-Subscribers, 15s. per volume. An Annual Payment of £1 will
entitle the Subscriber to Two annual volumes.

               Vols. for │FORDUN’S SCOTICHRONICON. Vol.
                         │I.

                1871-2.  │WYNTOUN’S CHRONICLE. Vol. I.

               Vols. for │WYNTOUN’S CHRONICLE. Vol. II.

                1872-3.  │FORDUN’S SCOTICHRONICON. Vol.
                         │II.

⸫ Detailed Lists of the forthcoming Volumes on application.

                  *       *       *       *       *

If the Gospel Narratives are Mythical, what then?

Crown 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

  “This is a striking little essay ... thoughtful and subtle. It is an
  attempt to show that something like the philosophy of the Christian
  Gospel would be forced upon us by the facts of our spiritual
  nature.”—Spectator.

Lectures on Scotch Legal Antiquities.

By COSMO INNES, F.S.A., author of “Scotland in the Middle Ages.”

Contents:—I. Introductory. II. Charters. III. Parliament. IV. The Old
Church. V. Old Forms of Law. VI. Rural Occupations. VII. Student’s Guide
Books. VIII. Appendix. In 1 vol. demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d.

Sketches of Early Scotch History. By COSMO INNES, F.S.A., Professor of
History in the University of Edinburgh. 1. The Church; its Old
Organisation, Parochial and Monastic. 2. Universities. 3. Family
History. 8vo, price 16s.

Concerning some Scotch Surnames.

By COSMO INNES, F.S.A., Professor of History in the University of
Edinburgh. Small 4to, cloth antique, 5s.

Instructive Picture-Books.

Folio, 7s. 6d. each.

  “These Volumes are among the most instructive Picture-books we have
  seen, and we know of none better calculated to excite and gratify the
  appetite of the young for the knowledge of nature.”—Times.

                                   I.

The Instructive Picture Book. A few Attractive Lessons from the Natural
History of Animals. By ADAM WHITE, late Assistant, Zoological
Department,

British Museum. With 54 folio coloured Plates. Eighth Edition,
containing many new Illustrations by Mrs. BLACKBURN, J. STEWART, GOURLAY
STEELL, and others.

                                  II.

The Instructive Picture Book. Lessons from the Vegetable World. By the
Author of ‘The Heir of Redclyffe,’ ‘The Herb of the Field,’ etc. New
Edition, with 64 Plates.

                                  III.

Instructive Picture Book. The Geographical Distribution of Animals, in a
Series of Pictures for the use of Schools and Families. By the late Dr.
GREVILLE. With descriptive letterpress. New Edition, with 60 Plates.

                                  IV.

Pictures of Animal and Vegetable Life in all Lands. 48 Folio Plates.

                                   V.

Recreative Instruction. Pictorial Lessons on Form, Comparison, and
number, for Children under 7 years of age, with explanations. By
Nicholas Bohny. Fifth edition. 26 Oblong folio Plates, price 7s. 6d.

The History of Scottish Poetry, From the Middle Ages to the Close of the
Seventeenth Century. By the late DAVID IRVING, LL.D. Edited by JOHN
AITKEN CARLYLE, M.D. With a Memoir and Glossary. Demy 8vo, 16s.

Johnny Gibb of Gushetneuk. 12mo, ornamental boards, price 2s.

Sermons by the Rev. John Ker, D.D., Glasgow.

Ninth Edition. Crown 8vo, price 6s.

  “This is a very remarkable volume of sermons. And it is no doubt a
  most favourable symptom of the healthiness of Christian thought among
  us, that we are so often able to begin a notice with these words.

  “We cannot help wishing that such notice more frequently introduced to
  our readers a volume of Church of England sermons. Still, looking
  beyond our pale, we rejoice notwithstanding.

  “Mr. Ker has dug boldly and diligently into the vein which Robertson
  opened; but the result, as compared with that of the first miner, is
  as the product of skilled machinery set against that of the vigorous
  unaided arm. There is no roughness, no sense of labour; all comes
  smoothly and regularly on the page—one thought evoked out of another.
  As Robertson strikes the rock with his tool, unlooked-for sparkles
  tempt him on; the workman exults in his discovery; behind each
  beautiful, strange thought, there is yet another more strange and
  beautiful still. Whereas, in this work, every beautiful thought has
  its way prepared, and every strange thought loses its power of
  starting by the exquisite harmony of its setting. Robertson’s is the
  glitter of the ore on the bank; Ker’s is the uniform shining of the
  wrought metal. We have not seen a volume of sermons for many a day
  which will so thoroughly repay both purchase and perusal and
  re-perusal. And not the least merit of these sermons is, that they are
  eminently suggestive.”—Contemporary Review.

  “The sermons before us are indeed of no common order; among a host of
  competitors they occupy a high class—we were about to say the highest
  class—whether viewed in point of composition, or thought, or
  treatment.

  “He has gone down in the diving-bell of a sound Christian philosophy,
  to the very depth of his theme, and has brought up treasures of the
  richest and most recherché character, practically showing the truth of
  his own remarks in the preface, ‘that there is no department of
  thought or action which cannot be touched by that gospel which is the
  manifold wisdom of God.’ These subjects he has exhibited in a style
  corresponding to their brilliancy and profoundness—terse and telling,
  elegant and captivating, yet totally unlike the tinsel ornaments laid
  upon the subject by an elaborate process of manipulation—a style which
  is the outcome of the sentiment and feelings within, shaping itself in
  appropriate drapery.”—British and Foreign Evangelical Review.

Studies for Sunday Evening; or, Readings in Holy Writ.

By LORD KINLOCH. New edition, in 2 vols. fcap. 8vo, price 9s.

                            Also separately.

Readings in Holy Writ, and Studies for Sunday Evening.

Price 4s. 6d. each.

Faith’s Jewels.

Presented in Verse, with other devout Verses. By LORD KINLOCH. Ex. fcap.
8vo, price 5s.

The Circle of Christian Doctrine;

A Handbook of Faith, framed out of a Layman’s experience. By LORD
KINLOCH. Third and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. 8vo, 2s. 6d.

Time’s Treasure; Or, Devout Thoughts for every Day of the Year. Expressed
in verse. By LORD KINLOCH. Fourth and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. 8vo, price
3s. 6d.

Devout Moments.

By LORD KINLOCH. Price 6d.

Hymns to Christ. By LORD KINLOCH. Ex. fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

The Philosophy of Ethics:

An Analytical Essay. By SIMON S. LAURIE, A.M. Demy 8vo, price 6s.

Notes, Expository and Critical, on certain British Theories of Morals. By
SIMON S. LAURIE. 8vo, price 6s.

The Reform of the Church of Scotland

In Worship, Government, and Doctrine. By ROBERT LEE, D.D., late
Professor of Biblical Criticism in the University of Edinburgh, and
Minister of Greyfriars. Part I. Worship. Second Edition, fcap. 8vo,
price 3s.

Life in Normandy;

Sketches of French Fishing, Farming, Cooking, Natural History, and
Politics, drawn from Nature. By an ENGLISH RESIDENT. Third Edition,
crown 8vo, cloth ex. gilt, price 4s. 6d.

A Memoir of Lady Anna Mackenzie, Countess of Balcarres, and afterwards of
Argyle, 1621-1706. By ALEXANDER LORD LINDSAY (Earl of Crawford). Fcap.
8vo, price 3s. 6d.

“All who love the byways of history should read this life of a loyal
Covenanter.”—Atlas.

Lismore, Book of the Dean of.

Specimens of Ancient Gaelic Poetry, collected between the years 1512 and
1529 by the Rev. JAMES M’GREGOR, Dean of Lismore—illustrative of the
Language and Literature of the Scottish Highlands prior to the Sixteenth
Century. Edited, with a Translation and Notes, by the Rev. THOMAS
MACLAUCHLAN. The Introduction and additional Notes by WILLIAM P. SKENE.
8vo, price 12s.

Literary Relics of the late A. S. Logan, Advocate, Sheriff of Forfarshire.
Extra fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

Little Ella and the Fire-King,

And other Fairy Tales. By M. W. with Illustrations by HENRY WARREN.
Second Edition. 16mo, cloth, 3s. 6d. Cloth extra, gilt edges, 4s.

Little Tales for Tiny Tots.

With 6 Illustrations by WARWICK BROOKES. Square 18mo, price 1s.

A Survey of Political Economy.

By JAMES MACDONELL, M.A. Ex. fcap. 8vo, price 6s.

“The author has succeeded in producing a book which is almost as easy
reading as a three-volume novel.”—Athenæum.

“Of its class it is one of the best we have seen; and had we to choose
for a beginner among the crowd of manuals and introductions to the
study, there is much which would induce us to recommend the present
volume.”—Spectator.

“Mr. Macdonell’s book, entitled ‘A Survey of Political Economy,’
establishes him as a writer of authority on economical subjects.”—MR.
NEWMARCH.

Ten Years North of the Orange River.

A Story of Everyday Life and Work among the South African Tribes, from
1859 to 1869. By JOHN MACKENZIE, of the London Missionary Society. With
Map and Illustrations. 1 vol. crown 8vo, cloth, extra gilt, price 4s.
6d.

Nugæ Canoræ Medicæ.

By DOUGLAS MACLAGAN, Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the
University of Edinburgh. A new edition, enlarged, with Illustrations by
THOMAS FAED, R.A.; WILLIAM DOUGLAS, R.S.A.; JAMES ARCHER, R.S.A.; JOHN
BALLANTYNE, R.S.A., etc. In 1 vol. 4to, price 7s. 6d.

Select Writings: Political, Scientific, Topographical, and Miscellaneous,
of the late CHARLES MACLAREN, F.R.S.E., F.G.S., Editor of the Scotsman.
Edited by ROBERT COX, F.S.A. Scot., and JAMES NICOL, F.R.S.E., F.G.S.,
Professor of Natural History in the University of Aberdeen. With a
Memoir and Portrait. 2 vols. crown 8vo, 15s.

Memorials of the Life and Ministry of Charles Calder

Mackintosh, D.D., of Tain and Dunoon. Edited, with a Sketch of the
Religious History of the Northern Highlands of Scotland, by the Rev.
WILLIAM TAYLOR, M.A. With Portrait. Second Edition, extra fcap. 8vo,
price 4s. 6d.

Macvicar’s (J. G., D.D.)

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE BEAUTIFUL; price 6s. 6d. FIRST LINES OF SCIENCE
SIMPLIFIED; price 5s. INQUIRY INTO HUMAN NATURE; price 7s. 6d.

Mary Stuart and the Casket Letters.

By J. F. N., with an Introduction by HENRY GLASSFORD BELL. Ex. fcap.
8vo, price 4s. 6d.

Max Havalaar;

Or, The Coffee Auctions of the Dutch Trading Company. By MULTATULI;
translated from the original MS. by Baron Nahuys. With Maps, price 14s.

Why the Shoe Pinches.

A contribution to Applied Anatomy. By HERMANN MEYER, M.D., Professor of
Anatomy in the University of Zurich. Price 6d.

The Estuary of the Forth and adjoining Districts viewed

Geologically. By DAVID MILNE HOME of Wedderburn. 8vo, cloth, with Map
and Plans, price 5s.

The Herring:

Its Natural History and National Importance. By JOHN M. MITCHELL. With
Six Illustrations, 8vo, price 12s.

The Insane in Private Dwellings.

By ARTHUR MITCHELL, A.M., M.D., Commissioner in Lunacy for Scotland,
etc. 8vo, price 4s. 6d.

Creeds and Churches.

By the REV. SIR HENRY WELLWOOD MONCREIFF, Bart., D.D. Demy 8vo, price
3s. 6d.

Ancient Pillar-Stones of Scotland:

Their Significance and Bearing on Ethnology. By GEORGE MOORE, M. D. 8vo,
price 6s. 6d.

Heroes of Discovery.

By SAMUEL MOSSMAN. Crown 8vo, price 5s.

Political Sketches of the State of Europe—from 1814-1867.

Containing Ernest Count Münster’s Despatches to the Prince Regent from
the Congress of Vienna and of Paris. By GEORGE HERBERT, Count Münster.
Demy 8vo, price 9s.

Biographical Annals of the Parish of Colinton.

By THOMAS MURRAY, LL.D. Crown 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

History Rescued, in Answer to “History Vindicated,” being a recapitulation
of “The Case for the Crown,” and the Reviewers Reviewed, in re the
Wigtown Martyrs. By MARK NAPIER. 8vo, price 5s.

Nightcaps: A Series of Juvenile Books. By “AUNT FANNY.” 6 vols. square
16mo, cloth. In case, price 12s., or separately, 2s. each volume.

    1. Baby Nightcaps.
    2. Little Nightcaps.
    3. Big Nightcaps.
    4. New Nightcaps.
    5. Old Nightcaps.
    6. Fairy Nightcaps.

  “Neither a single story nor a batch of tales in a single volume, but a
  box of six pretty little books of choice fiction, is Aunt Fanny’s
  contribution to the new supply of literary toys for the next
  children’s season. Imagine the delight of a little girl who, through
  the munificence of mamma or godmamma, finds herself possessor of Aunt
  Fanny’s tastefully-decorated box. Conceive the exultation with which,
  on raising the lid, she discovers that it contains six whole and
  separate volumes, and then say, you grown-up folk, whose pockets are
  bursting with florins, whether you do not think that a few of your
  pieces of white money would be well laid out in purchasing such
  pleasure for the tiny damsels of your acquaintance, who like to be
  sent to bed with the fancies of a pleasant story-teller clothing their
  sleepy heads with nightcaps of dreamy contentment. The only objection
  we can make to the quality and fashion of Aunt Fanny’s Nightcaps is,
  that some of their joyous notions are more calculated to keep
  infantile wearers awake all night than to dispose them to slumber. As
  nightcaps for the daytime, however, they are, one and all,
  excellent.”—Athenæum.

NEW NIGHTCAPS. New cheaper Edition, Fancy Cover, price 1s.

                  *       *       *       *       *

ODDS AND ENDS—Price 6d. Each.

        Vol. I., in Cloth, price 4s. 6d., containing Nos.  1-10.
        Vol. II.,  Do.                         do.   Nos. 11-19.

     1. Sketches of Highland Character.
     2. Convicts.
     3. Wayside Thoughts.
     4. The Enterkin.
     5. Wayside Thoughts—Part 2.
     6. Penitentiaries and Reformatories.
     7. Notes from Paris.
     8. Essays by an Old Man.
     9. Wayside Thoughts—Part 3.
    10. The Influence of the Reformation.
    11. The Cattle Plague.
    12. Rough Night’s Quarters.
    13. On the Education of Children.
    14. The Stormontfield Experiments.
    15. A Tract for the Times.
    16. Spain in 1866.
    17. The Highland Shepherd.
    18. Correlation of Forces.
    19. ‘Bibliomania.’
    20. A Tract on Twigs.
    21. Notes on Old Edinburgh.
    22. Gold-Diggings in Sutherland.
    23. Post-Office Telegraphs.

The Bishop’s Walk and The Bishop’s Times.

By ORWELL. Fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

Man: Where, Whence, and Whither?

Being a glance at Man in his Natural-History Relations. By DAVID PAGE,
LL.D. Fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

“Cautiously and temperately written.”—Spectator.

The Great Sulphur Cure.

By ROBERT PAIRMAN, Surgeon. Thirteenth Edition, price 1s.

Kidnapping in the South Seas.

Being a Narrative of a Three Months’ Cruise of H. M. Ship Rosario. By
CAPTAIN GEORGE PALMER, R.N., F.R.G.S. 8vo, illustrated, 10s. 6d.

France: Two Lectures.

By M. PREVOST-PARADOL, of the French Academy. 8vo, price 2s. 6d.

“Should be carefully studied by every one who wishes to know anything
about contemporary French History.”—Daily Review.

Suggestions on Academical Organisation,

With Special Reference to Oxford. By MARK PATTISON, B.D., Rector of
Lincoln College, Oxford. Crown 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

Practical Water-Farming.

By WM. PEARD, M.D., LL.D. 1 vol. fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

On Teaching Universities and Examining Boards.

By LYON PLAYFAIR, C.B., M.P. 8vo, price 1s.

On Primary and Technical Education.

By LYON PLAYFAIR, C.B., M.P. 8vo, price 1s.

Popular Genealogists;

Or, The Art of Pedigree-making. Crown 8vo, price 4s.

The Pyramid and the Bible:

The rectitude of the one in accordance with the truth of the other. By a
CLERGYMAN. Ex. fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

Quixstar.

By the Author of ‘Blindpits.’ A Novel, in 3 vols. Crown 8vo, price 31s.
6d.

Christ and his Seed: Central to all things; being a Series of Expository
Discourses on Paul’s Epistle to the Ephesians. By JOHN PULSFORD, Author
of ‘Quiet Hours.’ Square 8vo, price 8s. 6d.

A Critical History of the Christian Doctrine of Justification and
Reconciliation. By ALBRECHT RITSCHL, Professor Ordinarius of Theology in
the University of Göttingen. Translated from the German, with the
Author’s sanction, by JOHN S. BLACK, M.A. 8vo, cloth, price 12s.

“An exceedingly valuable contribution to theological literature. The
history begins no earlier than the Middle Ages; since he considers that
in earlier times, while the theory of a price paid to Satan was current,
there was no real theology on the subject. A more thorough historical
study of the doctrine of the Atonement, and a correct understanding and
appreciation of the various forms it has assumed in different schools,
are very much needed in this country.”—British and Foreign Evangelical
Review.

Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character.

By E. B. RAMSAY. M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.E., Dean of Edinburgh. Library
Edition, in demy 8vo, with Portrait by James Faed, price 10s. 6d.

⸫ The original Edition in 2 vols., with Introductions, price 12s.; and
the Popular Edition, price 2s., are still on sale.

“That venerable Dean, who is an absolute impersonation of the
‘reminiscences’ of all the Scottish Churches, who in his largeness of
heart embraces them all, and in his steadfast friendship, his generous
championship of forgotten truths and of unpopular causes, proves himself
to be in every sense the inheritor of the noble Scottish name which he
so worthily bears.”—Dean Stanley’s Lectures on the Church of Scotland.

Dean Ramsay’s Reminiscences.

Twenty-first Edition, in fcap. 8vo, boards, price 2s.; cloth extra, 2s.
6d.

“The Dean of Edinburgh has here produced a book for railway reading of
the very first class. The persons (and they are many) who can only under
such circumstances devote ten minutes of attention to any page, without
the certainty of a dizzy or stupid headache, in every page of this
volume will find some poignant anecdote or trait which will last them a
good half-hour for after-laughter: one of the pleasantest of human
sensations.”—Athenæum.

Recess Studies.

Edited by Sir ALEXANDER GRANT, Bart., LL.D. 8vo, price 12s.

Rights of Labour, and the Nine Hours’ Movement.

Addressed to the Men of Newcastle. By a LADY. Price One Penny.

Past and Present: or, Social and Religious Life in the North.

By H. G. REID. 1 vol., crown 8vo, illustrated, price 6s.

“These papers show great good sense, a thorough appreciation of the
importance of social questions, and a deep conviction of the influence
of principle and truth in a nation’s true progress.”—Freeman.

Art Rambles in Shetland.

By JOHN T. REID. Handsome 4to, cloth, profusely illustrated, price 25s.

“This record of Art Rambles may be classed among the most choice and
highly-finished of recent publications of this sort.”—Saturday Review.

The One Church on Earth. How it is manifested, and what are the Terms of
Communion with it. By REV. JOHN ROBERTSON, A.M., Arbroath. Extra fcap.
8vo, price 3s. 6d.

Historical Essays in connection with the Land and the

Church, etc. By E. WILLIAM ROBERTSON, Author of ‘Scotland under her
Early Kings.’ In 1 vol. 8vo, price 10s. 6d.

CONTENTS.

STANDARDS OF THE PAST IN WEIGHT AND CURRENCY.

PART I.—1. The Roman and Byzantine Pounds. 2. Talents of the Classical
Era. 3. The Roman Currency. 4. The Stipendium. 5. Early Byzantine
Currency. Approximate Standards.

PART II.—1. Early Substitutes for a Coinage. 2. Currency of the Early
Franks and the House of Capet. 3. Early Germanic and Frison Currency. 4.
Norwegian and Irish Currency. 5. Morabetin and Early Spanish Currency.
6. Early English Currency and Standards. Mediæval Standards.

THE YEAR AND THE INDICTION.

THE LAND.—1. The Acre. 2. The Hide. 3. The Land-gavel. 4. The Shire. 5.
Scottish Measurements. 6. Irish Measurements. 7. Irish Land-tenure. 8.
The Toshach and the Thane.

  CHAPTERS OF ENGLISH HISTORY BEFORE THE CONQUEST.—1. The King’s Wife.
  2. Handfasting. 3. The King’s Kin. 4. Dunstan and his Policy. 5. The
  Coronation of Edgar.

                                 ROME.

               In 1 vol. Demy 8vo, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

Scotland under her Early Kings.

A History of the Kingdom to the close of the 13th century. By E. WILLIAM
ROBERTSON. In 2 vols. 8vo, cloth, 36s.

  “Mr. Robertson, in the Appendix to his “Scotland under her Early
  Kings” on the English claims, appears to the Editor to have completely
  disposed of the claims founded on the passages in the Monkish
  Historians prior to the Norman Conquest. This paper is one of the
  acutest and most satisfactory of these very able essays.”—W. F. Skene
  in Preface to ‘Chronicles of the Picts and Scots.’

Doctor Antonio.

A Tale. By JOHN RUFFINI. Cheap Edition, crown 8vo, boards, 2s. 6d.

Lorenzo Benoni; Or, Passages in the Life of an Italian. By JOHN RUFFINI.
With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 5s. Cheap Edition, crown 8vo,
boards, 2s. 6d.

The Salmon;

Its History, Position, and Prospects. By ALEX. RUSSEL. 8vo, price 7s.
6d.

Druidism Exhumed. Proving that the Stone Circles of Britain were Druidical
Temples. By REV. JAMES RUST. Fcap. 8vo, price 4s. 6d.

Gowodean:

A Pastoral, by JAMES SALMON. 8vo, price 6s.

Natural History and Sport in Moray.

Collected from the Journals and Letters of the late CHARLES ST. JOHN,
Author of ‘Wild Sports of the Highlands.’ With a short Memoir of the
Author. Crown 8vo, price 8s. 6d.

A Handbook of the History of Philosophy.

By DR. ALBERT SCHWEGLER. Fourth Edition. Translated and Annotated by J.
HUTCHISON STIRLING, LL.D., Author of the ‘Secret of Hegel.’ Crown 8vo,
price 6s.

  “Schwegler’s is the best possible handbook of the history of
  philosophy, and there could not possibly be a better translator of it
  than Dr. Stirling.”—Westminster Review.

The Scottish Poor-Laws: Examination of their Policy, History, and
Practical Action. By SCOTUS. 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

  “This book is a magazine of interesting facts and acute observations
  upon this vitally important subject.”—Scotsman.

Gossip about Letters and Letter-Writers.

By GEORGE SETON, Advocate, M.A. Oxon., F.S.A. Scot. Fcap. 8vo, price 2s.
6d.

  “A very agreeable little brochure, which anybody may dip into with
  satisfaction to while away idle hours.”—Echo.

‘Cakes, Leeks, Puddings, and Potatoes.’

A Lecture on the Nationalities of the United Kingdom. By GEORGE SETON,
Advocate, M.A. Oxon., etc. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo, sewed, price 6d.

Culture and Religion.

By J. C. SHAIRP, Principal of the United College of St. Salvator and St.
Leonards, St. Andrews. Third Edition, fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

  “A wise book, and unlike a great many other wise books, has that
  carefully-shaded thought and expression which fits Professor Shairp to
  speak for Culture no less than for Religion.”—Spectator.

John Keble:

An Essay on the Author of the ‘Christian Year.’ By J. C. SHAIRP,
Principal of the United College of St. Salvator and St. Leonards, St.
Andrews. Fcap. 8vo, price 3s.

Studies in Poetry and Philosophy.

By J. C. SHAIRP, Principal of the United College of St. Salvator and St.
Leonard’s, St. Andrews. Second Edition, 1 vol. fcap. 8vo, price 6s.

The Shores of Fife; or the Forth and Tay.

Comprising Inland Scenery in Fife, Perth, Clackmannan, Kinross, and
Stirling: with frontispiece—“Queen Margaret expounding the Scriptures to
Malcolm Canmore,” presented by SIR NOEL PATON, Knight, R.S.A., Her
Majesty’s Limner for Scotland; and original drawings, by WALLER H.
PATON, R.S.A., SAMUEL BOUGH, A.R.S.A., JOHN LAWSON, W. F. VALLANCE, E.
T. CRAWFORD, R.S.A., CLARK STANTON, A.R.S.A., J. H. OSWALD, JOHN T.
REID, and other Artists. Engraved by WILLIAM BALLINGALL.

                              CONTAINING—

  AN OUTLINE OF THE ARCHÆOLOGY OR FIFE, by A. LAING, F.S.A. Scot.,
  Newburgh-on-Tay.

  HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT OF ST. ANDREWS, by the Very Rev.
  PRINCIPAL TULLOCH, D.D.

  HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON FALKLAND PALACE, LOCHLEVEN,
  RUMBLING BRIDGE, PERTH, DUNDEE, NEWPORT, BROUGHTY-FERRY, BELL ROCK,
  etc., by the Rev. GEORGE GILFILLAN.

  STIRLING, ALLOA, CLACKMANNAN TOWER, CASTLE CAMPBELL, DOLLAR,
  KINCARDINE, etc., by the Rev. J. MITCHELL HARVEY, M.A.

  THE SHORES FROM LEVEN TO TORRYBURN, INCLUDING DUNFERMLINE, etc., by
  the Rev. JAMES S. MILL.

  THE SHORES FROM LARGO TO ST. ANDREWS, by the Author of ‘The Hotel Du
  Petit St. Jean.’

  THE EDEN, CUPAR, KENNOWAY, KETTLE, LESLIE, MARKINCH, THORNTON,
  LEUCHARS, LADYBANK, etc., by JOHN T. REID, Author of ‘Art Rambles in
  Shetland.’

  AN OUTLINE OF THE GEOLOGY OF FIFE, by DAVID PAGE, LL.D., Professor of
  Geology, College of Science, Newcastle.

  SKETCH OF THE MINERALOGY OF FIFE, by M. FORSTER HEDDLE, M.D.,
  Professor of Chemistry, University of St. Andrews.

  AN OUTLINE OF THE BOTANY OF FIFE, by CHARLES HOWIE, Secretary of the
  Largo Field Naturalists’ Society.

  4to, Cloth, price 30s.

A Memoir of the late Sir James Y. Simpson Bart., M.D.

By JOHN DUNS, D.D., Professor of Natural Science, New College,
Edinburgh. Demy, 8vo.

Archæological Essays by the late Sir James Y. Simpson, Bart., M.D.,
D.C.L., one of her Majesty’s Physicians for Scotland, and Professor of
Medicine and Midwifery in the University of Edinburgh. Edited by JOHN
STUART, LL.D., Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland,
Author of ‘The Sculptured Stones of Scotland,’ etc. etc. 2 vols. sm.
4to, half Roxburghe, price £2:2s.

Proposal to Stamp out Small-pox and other Contagious

Diseases. By Sir J. Y. SIMPSON, Bart., M.D., D.C.L. Price 1s.

The Four Ancient Books of Wales, Containing the Cymric Poems attributed to
the Bards of the Sixth Century. By WILLIAM F. SKENE. With Maps and
Facsimiles. 2 vols. 8vo, price 36s.

“Mr. Skene’s book will, as a matter of course and necessity,
find its place on the tables of all Celtic antiquarians and
scholars.”—Archæologia Cambrensis.

The Coronation Stone.

By WILLIAM F. SKENE. Small 4to. With Illustrations in Photography and
Zincography. Price 6s.

Nearness of Kin: its Principle in Scripture and in Nature.

By Rev. J. M. SLOAN. 8vo, price 6d.

The Sermon on the Mount.

By the REV. WALTER C. SMITH, Author of ‘The Bishop’s Walk, and other
Poems, by Orwell,’ and ‘Hymns of Christ and Christian Life.’ Crown 8vo,
price 6s.

Disinfectants and Disinfection.

By DR. ROBERT ANGUS SMITH. 8vo, price 5s.

“By common consent Dr. Angus Smith has become the first authority in
Europe on the subject of Disinfectants. To this subject he has devoted a
large portion of his scientific life; and now, in a compact volume of
only 138 pages, he has condensed the result of twenty years of patient
study. To Sanitary officers, to municipal and parochial authorities,
and, indeed, to all who are particularly concerned for the public health
and life; and who is not? we sincerely commend Dr. Angus Smith’s
treatise.”—Chemical News.

Life and Work at the Great Pyramid.

With a Discussion of the Facts Ascertained. By C. PIAZZI SMYTH,
F.R.SS.L. and E., Astronomer-Royal for Scotland. 3 vols. demy 8vo, price
56s.

An Equal-Surface Projection for Maps of the World, and its Application to
certain Anthropological Questions. By C. PIAZZI SMYTH, F.R.SS.L. & E.,
Astronomer-Royal for Scotland. 8vo, price 3s.

Britain’s Art Paradise; or, Notes on some Pictures in the Royal Academy,
1871. By the EARL of SOUTHESK. 8vo, sewed, price 1s.

Sir Walter Scott as a Poet.

By GILBERT MALCOLM SPROAT. 8vo, cloth, price 2s. 6d.

Ruined Castles, Monuments of Former Men, in the Vicinity of Banff. By
JAMES SPENCE. Crown 8vo, price 5s.

Scottish Liturgies of the Reign of James VI., from MSS. in the British
Museum and Advocates’ Library. Edited, with an Introduction and Notes,
by the REV. GEO. W. SPROTT, B.A. Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, price 4s. 6d.

  “The title of this book will be enough to make many pass it by as of
  mere denominational interest. It is, on the contrary, one of national
  importance, and ought to be carefully studied by all who, through any
  line of descent, connect themselves with early Scotch
  Protestantism.”—Courant.

The Doctrine of Christ Developed by the Apostles: a Treatise on the
Offices of the Redeemer, and the Doxology of the Redeemer. By REV.
EDWARD STEANE, D.D. 8vo, Price 10s. 6d.

  “I have now attentively, and with great pleasure, perused your volume,
  and I desire to express my sincere thankfulness to God and to you for
  so timely a publication.”—J. H. HINTON, M.A.

  “We have read this volume with more than ordinary pleasure. In the
  midst of so much in modern theological literature that is
  objectionable or doubtful, it is refreshing to meet with a clear,
  manly, outspoken exposition of those great evangelical doctrines which
  are in danger of being less ‘commonly believed among us’ than they
  were among our fathers. The style of the whole book is clear, free,
  and vigorous; it is characterised by a tone of sustained eloquence
  which reminds us more of the style of Dr. Chalmers than anything we
  have read for a long time.”—Wesleyan Methodist Magazine.

  “The style is graceful and flowing, the spirit devout and tender, and
  the theology of the Puritan type.”—General Baptist Magazine.

  “Here there is no uncertain sound on the doctrine of substitution and
  of expiatory sacrifice, nor on that which Luther called ‘Articulus
  stantis vel cadentis ecclesiæ,’ the great doctrine of justification by
  faith.”—Daily Review.

  “In our judgment, a more valuable contribution in a single volume to
  the exposition, defence, and illustration of evangelical truth has not
  been often made. Thoughtful educated Christian laymen, students, and
  young ministers, will read it with equal pleasure and profit.”—The
  Literary World.

  “A handsome welcome book, full of the old Gospel, and rich in
  tenderness and feeling, the ripe fruit of an honoured and green old
  age. The work is conscientiously and lovingly done, and the result is
  a treatise on the Prophetic, Priestly, and Kingly Offices of Our Lord
  such as will give to all readers much intelligent thought and much
  holy and suggestive sentiment. The text gives proof of careful study
  and ample scholarship, and it is further enriched with notes taken
  from recent Biblical criticism.”—The Freeman.

Memoir of Sir James Dalrymple, First Viscount Stair, President of the
Court of Session in Scotland, and Author of ‘The Institutions of the Law
of Scotland.’ A Study in the History of Scotland and Scotch Law during
the Seventeenth Century. By Æ. J. G. MACKAY, Advocate. 8vo, price 12s.

History Vindicated in the Case of the Wigtown Martyrs.

By the REV. ARCHIBALD STEWART. Second Edition. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

Dugald Stewart’s Collected Works.

Edited by Sir WILLIAM HAMILTON, Bart., Vols. I. to X. 8vo, cloth, each
12s.

  Vol. I.—Dissertation. Vols. II. III. and IV.—Elements of the
  Philosophy of the Human Mind. Vol. V.—Philosophical Essays. Vols. VI.
  and VII—Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of Man. Vols. VIII.
  and IX.—Lectures on Political Economy. Vol. X.—Biographical Memoirs of
  Adam Smith, LL.D., William Robertson, D.D., and Thomas Reid, D.D.; to
  which is prefixed a Memoir of Dugald Stewart, with Selections from his
  Correspondence, by John Veitch, M.A. Supplementary Vol.—Translations
  of the Passages in Foreign Languages contained in the Collected Works;
  with General Index.

Jerrold, Tennyson, Macaulay, and other Critical Essays.

By JAMES HUTCHISON STIRLING, LL.D., Author of ‘The Secret of Hegel.’ 1
vol. fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

  “The author of ‘The Secret of Hegel’ here gives us his opinions of the
  lives and works of those three great representative Englishmen whose
  names appear on the title-page of the work before us. Dr. Stirling’s
  opinions are entitled to be heard, and carry great weight with them.
  He is a lucid and agreeable writer, a profound metaphysician, and by
  his able translations from the German has proved his grasp of mind and
  wide acquaintance with philosophical speculation.”—Examiner.

Songs of the Seasons.

By THOMAS TOD STODDART, Author of ‘The Angler’s Companion.’ Crown 8vo,
price 6s.

Christ the Consoler;

Or, Scriptures, Hymns, and Prayers, for Times of Trouble and Sorrow.
Selected and arranged by the REV. ROBERT HERBERT STORY, Minister of
Roseneath. Fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

Recollections of Professor John Duncan.

By the Rev. A. MOODY STUART. Uniform with ‘Colloquia Peripatetica.’
Fcap. 8vo, cloth, price 3s. 6d.

Outlines of Scottish Archæology.

By REV. G. SUTHERLAND. 12mo, sewed, profusely Illustrated, price 1s.

Works by the late Professor Syme.

OBSERVATIONS IN CLINICAL SURGERY. Second Edition. 8vo, price 8s. 6d.

STRICTURE OF THE URETHRA, AND FISTULA IN PERINEO. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

TREATISE ON THE EXCISION OF DISEASED JOINTS. 8vo, 5s.

ON DISEASES OF THE RECTUM. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

EXCISION OF THE SCAPULA. 8vo, price 2s. 6d.

Taine’s History of English Literature.

A New and carefully revised Library Edition. In 4 vols., small demy 8vo,
price 7s. 6d. each.

                                                   [Vol. I. immediately.

Taine’s History of English Literature.

Translated from the French by HENRI VAN LAUN. Third edition. 2 Vols.
demy 8vo, price 21s.

⸫ Copies of Vol. ii., Second Edition, may still be had to complete sets.

  “‘Taine’s History of English Literature’ shows a sounder appreciation
  of the spirit of our literature, and is a better exponent of its
  growth from stage to stage, and of the minute characteristics of each
  stage, than any of the numerous summaries and outline histories that
  have been produced by Englishmen.... Of the general method pursued by
  M. Taine in this work we cannot speak too highly.... We are bound to
  bear testimony at once to the very great ability with which M. Van
  Laun has translated the work.”—The Examiner.

  “Taine’s short chapter on Chaucer is thoroughly well worth reading....
  His chapter on our dramatic literature is particularly noteworthy....
  A better exposition of the nature and ramifications of Shakspeare’s
  genius could hardly be looked for within the limits of a moderately
  short chapter.”—The Examiner.

  “M. van Laun has done a difficult task admirably well, by translating
  into the English of a scholar one of the most brilliant books that
  France has produced for years.... The analysis of a consummate critic
  and a brilliant rhetorician ... with as true a sympathy as if all his
  life he had breathed the intellectual air of England.”—The Spectator.

Thermodynamics.

By P. G. TAIT, Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of
Edinburgh. 1 vol. 8vo, price 5s.

Day-Dreams of a Schoolmaster.

By D’ARCY W. THOMPSON. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

Sales Attici:

Or, The Maxims, Witty and Wise, of Athenian Tragic Drama. By D’ARCY
WENTWORTH THOMPSON, Professor of Greek in Queen’s College, Galway. Fcap.
8vo, price 9s.

Two Little Rabbits, or the Sad Story of Whitetail.

By G. A. DALRYMPLE. With 8 Illustrations. Square 18mo, price 1s.

Handbook of the Education (Scotland) Act, 1872.

Containing—I. A digest of the Act, with subjects grouped for the
convenience of School Boards. II. Copy of the Act, with Explanatory
Notes. III. The Incorporated Acts, Industrial Schools’ Act, etc., and
Index. By JAMES TOD, Advocate. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, price 2s. 6d.

Twelve Years in China:

By a British Resident. With coloured Illustrations. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

Travels by Umbra. 8vo, price 10s. 6d.

Hotch-Pot.

By UMBRA. An Old Dish with New Materials. Fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.

The Merchant’s Sermon and other Stories.

By L. B. WALFORD. 18mo, price 1s. 6d.

  “A volume of very modest appearance which deserves more than the brief
  notice for which we can find space. The four tales it contains are all
  pleasant and spirited little stories. The last of these, ‘Dolly
  Spanker’s Green Feather,’ is really admirable.”—Spectator.

A History of the Battle of Bannockburn, fought A.D. 1314.

With Map and Armorial Bearings, and Notices of the principal Warriors
who engaged in that Conflict. By ROBERT WHITE, Author of ‘A History of
the Battle of Otterburn.’ 1 vol. 8vo, price 12s.

Dante’s—The Inferno.

Translated line for line by W. P. WILKIE, Advocate. Fcap. 8vo, price 5s.

Researches on Colour-Blindness.

With a Supplement on the danger attending the present system of Railway
and Marine Coloured Signals. By the late GEORGE WILSON, M.D. 8vo, 5s.

An Historical Sketch of the French Bar, from its Origin to the Present
Day. By ARCHIBALD YOUNG, Advocate. Demy 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

  “A useful contribution to our knowledge of the leading French
  politicians of the present day.”—Saturday Review.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ The Errata was applied to the text. The corrections made are as
      follows:
        ▪ Page lxxix.—For “Há Kirkiu”, read “Há Kirkia”.
        ▪ Page 44.—For “She was married to Kolbein Hruga, read “She was
          the mother of Hakon Barn and of Herborg, who was married to
          Kolbein Hruga.”
        ▪ Page 135.—After “Verbon”, read “(Nerbon).”
        ▪ Page Footnote 1 on p. 157 (footnote 403).—For “Corness”, read
          “Carness”.
        ▪ Page Footnote 1 on p. 192 (footnote 449).—For “death”, in Note
          1, read “divorce”.

    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_);
      text that was bold by “equal” signs (=bold=).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Orkneyinga Saga, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORKNEYINGA SAGA ***

***** This file should be named 57723-0.txt or 57723-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/7/2/57723/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great War of 189-, by 
P. Colomb and J. F. Maurice and F. N. Maude and Archibald Forbes and Charles Lowe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Great War of 189-

Author: P. Colomb
        J. F. Maurice
        F. N. Maude
        Archibald Forbes
        Charles Lowe

Release Date: August 16, 2018 [EBook #57707]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT WAR OF 189- ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                         THE GREAT WAR OF 189—


[Illustration:

  THE BOMBARDMENT OF VARNA.

  ‘A black mass of some kind was seen to drop from the Russian balloon;
    as it reached the level of tallest buildings it suddenly exploded,
    its course being marked by crashing buildings and falling ruins.’

  _Frontispiece._
]




                                  THE
                           GREAT WAR OF 189—
                              _A FORECAST_


                                    BY

 REAR-ADMIRAL P. COLOMB COLONEL J. F. MAURICE, R.A., CAPTAIN F. N. MAUDE,
   ARCHIBALD FORBES, CHARLES LOWE, D. CHRISTIE MURRAY AND F. SCUDAMORE


 _WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS FROM SKETCHES SPECIALLY MADE FOR ‘BLACK AND
                          WHITE’ BY F. VILLIERS_

[Illustration]

                                 LONDON

                           WILLIAM HEINEMANN

                                  1895




                            _SECOND EDITION_

                    _First Edition, December, 1892_

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 NOTE.


The following narrative appeared originally in the pages of _Black and
White_, the work being the outcome of consultations between some of the
most eminent authorities upon modern warfare and international politics.
The story has been carefully revised, and is now reprinted in response
to a general wish that it should be available in a convenient form.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

 Attempted Assassination of Prince Ferdinand of Bulgaria,              1

 Russian Movement upon the Austrian Frontier,                         26

 Interview between General Caprivi and the French Ambassador,         30

 Departure of Troops to the East,                                     32

 Banquet in the Schloss,                                              33

 Ill-treatment of a War-correspondent by the German Hussars,          37

 The Austrian Plan of Campaign,                                       40

 First Collision of Russian and German Troops,                        43

 Warlike Excitement in Paris,                                         44

 Declaration of War by France,                                        52

 The German Plan of Campaign,                                         61

 The French Plan of Campaign,                                         65

 Public Feeling of England,                                           66

 Battle at Alexandrovo,                                               71

 Occupation of Alexandrovo by the Germans,                            74

 Capture of Czenstochau by Prince George of Saxony,                   76

 Night Attack by the Russians,                                        78

 Repulse of the German Army,                                          85

 Excitement in Brussels,                                              86

 The Meeting of the Four Fleets,                                      92

 Retreat of French Cruisers,                                          96

 On Board the Flagship,                                               99

 Preparations for the Landing of British Troops at Trebizonde,       102

 Repulse of the Russians,                                            106

 The Russo-German Campaign—Great Battle at Skierniwiçe,              110

 Italy mobilises her Army, and takes the Field against France,       121

 The Council of War,                                                 124

 Italian Route—Through the Riviera,                                  126

 Battle of Costebelle,                                               129

 The Landing at Trebizonde,                                          132

 Mobilisation of the First Army Corps,                               138

 Russia declares War against England,                                147

 Declaration of War in London,                                       148

 The Position of Affairs,                                            158

 Preparations in the Mediterranean Fleet,                            160

 The Battle of Sardinia,                                             165

 The Franco-German Campaign—Cavalry Engagement near Ligny,           171

 Engagement at Vaux Champagne,                                       178

 The Battle of Machault,                                             184

 The War in the far East—The Capture of Vladivostock,                193

 Events in the East of Europe,                                       199

 Arrival of British Troops in the Sea of Marmora,                    201

 Feeling in Australia,                                               206

 Instructions from the Admiralty,                                    211

 The Franco-German Campaign—The German Advance,                      213

 Advance of the Second and Third Armies on Paris,                    221

 The March upon the French Capital,                                  223

 British Campaign in Bulgaria,                                       225

 The Bombardment of Varna,                                           228

 Rout of the Russian Army,                                           234

 The Battle of Kosluji,                                              236

 Enthusiasm in Cairo,                                                241

 French Intrigues in Egypt,                                          248

 Fierce Battle near Wady Halfa,                                      252

 The Franco-German Campaign—Rescue of Paris,                         258

 Advance of General de Galliffet,                                    262

 Brisk Cavalry Engagement,                                           265

 Great Victory of the French,                                        267

 The General Situation,                                              274

 Capture of Sierra Leone by the French,                              279

 Siege of Herat,                                                     281

 Dispatch of Troops by the Canadian Pacific Railway to India,        282

 Cessation of Hostilities—France and Germany,                        287

 England and Russia,                                                 289

 The Services of England,                                            293

 General Effects of the War,                                         295


                                APPENDIX.

 Sir Charles Tupper on Imperial Defence,                             299

 An Interview with the Right Hon. Sir Charles Dilke,                 303




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    PAGE

 The Bombardment of Varna,                                _Frontispiece_

 The Attempted Assassination of Prince Ferdinand of                   11
   Bulgaria,

 M. Stambuloff, Prime Minister of Bulgaria, appointed                 13
   Regent after the attempted Assassination of Prince
   Ferdinand,

 The Bulgarian Mobilisation—Troops marching through the               15
   streets of Philippopolis,

 The Servo-Bulgarian Campaign—Through Pirot to the Front,             17

 An Affair of Outpost—The First Shot in the                           19
   Servo-Bulgarian Campaign,

 The Occupation of Belgrade—‘Here at Last!’                           21

 With the Turks: Admiral Woods Pacha’s Fleet of Torpedo               24
   Boats steaming through the Bosphorus,

 Russian Infantry Landing at Varna,                                   25

 The Knights of Malta at Ambulance Work,                              41

 Extraordinary Scene in the Place de la Concorde: The Mob             47
   tearing the Mourning Emblems from the Statue of
   Strasburg,

 The Naval Battle off Dantzig—The Sinking of a Russian                58
   Torpedo Boat and Rescue of the Crew by an English
   Yacht,

 The Naval Battle off Dantzig—Wounded Russians on Board               60
   the English Yacht,

 A Scene in the House of Commons—Sir William Harcourt                 68
   questions the Government,

 British Troops in the Place Verte, Antwerp,                          88

 Sinking of the Yacht ’Elaine,                                        97

 British Troops landing at Trebizonde,                               103

 The Storming of Skierniwiçe,                                        119

 Italian Artillery crossing the Mont Cenis,                          128

 Lord Salisbury addressing the House of Lords on the                 134
   Question of Peace and War,

 The Mobilisation of the English Army—Troops marching                139
   through the Dock Gates, Portsmouth,

 Reserve Men served with the New Magazine-Rifle, and off             143
   to the front to-morrow,

 Reading the Mobilisation Order,                                     145

 Declaration of War against Russia from the Steps of the             149
   Royal Exchange,

 Calling Out the Volunteers—Parade of the Signallers of              155
   the St. Martin’s Le Grand Corps,

 Our Correspondent at the Battle of Vaux Champagne,                  180

 The Battle of Machault: The German Cavalry charging the             186
   Rallying Squares of the French,

 The Taking of Vladivostock: Goorkas Protecting the Guns,            197

 British Transports passing the Dardanelles: Fort Chanak             202
   saluting the English Ships,

 The Sultan, Lord Wolseley, and Sir Clare Ford watching              205
   the Passage of the British Fleet through the Bosphorus
   from the Steps of the Dolma Baghtche Palace,

 German Cavalry Attack by Night on the French Bivouacs,              220

 Scene in the Streets of Rheims: German Troops clearing              222
   the Streets of French Rioters,

 The Battle of Kosluji: Sir Evelyn Wood’s Attack on the              238
   Russian Forces,

 Map of the Fight near Varna,                                        239

 Scene outside Shepheard’s Hotel, Cairo: Tommy Atkins                243
   about to quit Egypt,

 Soudanese Attack upon a Reconnoitring Party,                        254

 French Cavalry charging the Prussian Infantry,                      270

 Our New Route to India: A Sleeping-Car on the Canadian              283
   Pacific Railway,

 Tommy Atkins bargaining with the Indians on the Canadian            285
   Pacific Railway,

 Our New Route to India: Rations on the Canadian and                 286
   Pacific Railway,

 Sir Charles Tupper in his Private Office in Victoria                300
   Street, Westminster,

 The Right Hon. Sir Charles Dilke,                                   304




                         THE GREAT WAR OF 189—




                              A FORECAST.


  In the following narrative an attempt is made to forecast the course
  of events preliminary and incidental to the Great War which, in the
  opinion of military and political experts, will probably occur in
  the immediate future. The writers, who are well-known authorities on
  international politics and strategy, have striven to derive material
  for their description of the conflict from the best sources, to
  conceive the most probable campaigns and acts of policy, and
  generally to give to their work the verisimilitude and actuality of
  real warfare.




        ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF PRINCE FERDINAND OF BULGARIA.

 FULL ACCOUNT OF THE MURDEROUS ASSAULT; CRITICAL CONDITION OF THE WOUNDED
                                 PRINCE.


   (_By Telegraph from our Own Correspondent, Mr. Francis Scudamore._)

                        CONSTANTINOPLE, _Sunday, April 3_ (_viâ_ VARNA).
                                              _Noon._

A report has been current here since a late hour last evening, to the
effect that an attempt has been made to assassinate Prince Ferdinand of
Bulgaria, at a mining town named Samakoff, about forty miles south of
Sofia. It is said that the Prince, who had been shooting in the
Balabancha Balkans, was driving into Samakoff towards evening yesterday,
when his carriage was stopped, and he was attacked by a number of men
armed with knives and pistols. The Prince’s attendants succeeded in
saving their master’s life and in beating off some and capturing others
of his assailants, but not before His Highness had been severely
wounded.

Prince Ferdinand was carried into the house of an American missionary
resident in Samakoff, where he now lies. His Highness’s condition is
serious, and is rendered the more critical from the fact that there is
no very adequate surgical aid obtainable in Samakoff, and it was
necessary to telegraph for doctors to Sofia and Philippopolis.

The greatest excitement reigns in Constantinople since the receipt of
this intelligence, and very grave anxiety is expressed in diplomatic
circles as to the possible consequences of this terrible misfortune.


                          EDITORIAL COMMENTS.

It is impossible to overrate the grave significance of this attempted
assassination at Samakoff, which in the light of our Correspondent’s
telegrams would seem to be the prelude to very serious complications in
the East. It is, of course, too early to estimate its influence upon
general European politics, but we are quite within reason in saying that
the dramatic incident may prove to have endangered the peace of Europe.
We have long familiarised ourselves with the thought that the Great War
of which the world has been in constant dread for some years back, and
which is to re-adjust the balance of the Continent, is much more likely
to break out in the region of the Danube than on the banks of the Rhine,
and the incident at Samakoff may well precipitate the catastrophe. The
situation is most perilous, and it is to be hoped that strenuous
endeavours will be made by the Powers to chain up the ‘dogs of war,’ and
spare this dying century, at least, the spectacle of their release.
Since the Treaty of Berlin patched up the last serious disturbance in
Europe, there has been peace; peace, it is true; but a peace subject to
perpetual menace, and weighty matter for the consideration of statesmen.
Europe has lived, as it were, in armed camps, neutral and watchful; and
all the time the nations have prepared against war as though war were at
their doors. The dastardly outrage at Samakoff comes at a sorry time.

For we repeat our firm conviction, based on long and close attention to
the political motives at work among the nations, that it is on the
Danube and not on the Rhine that the torch of war will first be kindled.
To a pessimist, indeed, if not to an unbiassed observer, we may well
seem of late to have been drawing nearer and nearer to a general war.
The world has never been afflicted with more persistent rumours of war.
No single day has passed without bringing us its perturbing crop of
tremors and apprehensions about the stability of the European peace.
From week to week the Jewish speculators on all the Bourses of
Christendom have been robbed of their sleep, and, worse still, of their
dividends, by telegrams as to the secret massing of troops on this or
that frontier, and of ruinous uprisings in various subject and
down-trodden countries. Now it is the Black Sea Treaty that is going to
be forcibly robbed of its entire Dardanelles clauses, and again the
Bargain of Berlin is about to be perforated, for the sixth time, by the
sword-point of the Czar. Then the Roumanians wake up to find the
Russians beginning to hem them in on three sides; while, again,
newspaper readers are horrified by a revelation of the rapacious
passions which some dignify by the title of ‘principle of nationality,’
and others denounce as criminal ‘lust of land,’ that are on the verge of
outbreak at Athens and Sofia, at St. Petersburg, at Belgrade, at Vienna,
at Paris, and even at Rome.

Where is the wisdom of highly-placed men like the German Emperor and his
new Chancellor assuring the world, in addresses from the throne and
after-dinner speeches, that the peace of Europe was never more assured
than at present, and that the political horizon is without a cloud even
of the size of Elijah’s ominous and initial speck of vapour? What is the
truth or the wisdom of such assurances, when the thorn of
Alsace-Lorraine is still sticking in the flesh of the unforgiving and
revengeful French; when Italy still has some territory ‘unredeemed;’
when Denmark still harbours a deep grudge against her truculent
despoiler; when even the peaceful Swedes, who are still animated by the
spirit of the Great Gustavus, long to free their former subjects, the
Finns, from the tyrannical mastery of the Russians; when the Spaniards
would gladly profit by a European complication—even if they shrank from
the thought of an audacious _coup de main_—to repossess themselves of
Gibraltar; when the Portuguese, following suit, would never hesitate to
kick their British rival in Africa, if they deemed him to be down; when
the Cretans, egged on by the Greeks, are firmly resolved to throw off
the galling yoke of the Turks; when ex-ministers like M. Tricoupis stump
about the Balkan Peninsula, openly preaching Pan-hellenism and Balkan
Federation against the advocates of disunited nationalities; when the
Servians secretly vow to settle up old scores with their Bulgarian
vanquishers, and when these Bulgarian victors themselves, with their
Prime Minister more than their Prince at their head, are sternly
determined to be free and independent alike of Sultan and of Czar; when
Austria continues to cast longing eyes in the direction of Salonika; and
when, above all things, the Colossus of the North, with his head
pillowed on snow, and his feet swathed in flowers of the sunny South,
has sworn by the soul of his assassinated and sainted father that he
will ever remain true to the intention of his sire in exacting a solid
equivalent of power, prestige, and territorial foothold on the Balkan
Peninsula for all the blood and treasure spent by Russia in the task of
‘liberating’ the Bulgarians; when all these things, all these slumbering
passions and meditated schemes of aggression and revenge are duly
considered, how is it possible for any one, be he sovereign or subject,
to lull the world asleep by false assurances of peace which is sooner or
later doomed to be broken?

The Triple Alliance will no more succeed in terrorising the souls of all
these secret plotters and designers, and in giving them pause, than
three inter-locked mountain oaks or firs could stay the downward course
of an extended series of separate avalanches, which rend away with them
pines, and oaks, and all, in their resistless rush. But has the
avalanche, which we thus dread, really and truly at last begun to move?
We sincerely trust not, but for the present at least, the omens in the
East have an exceedingly ugly and alarming look, and we shall await the
arrival of further telegrams with the greatest anxiety. The Triple
Alliance is not an embankment that can bar the advancing flood of war,
but rather a detached fortress which must itself soon incur the danger
of being surrounded and even submerged by the rushing, whirling waters
of European strife. Though the parties to this three-cornered pact have
agreed to place their fire-engines, so to speak, at each other’s
disposal in the event of external danger from fire to their respective
domiciles, it is beyond the reach of these Powers to prevent the
outbreak of a conflagration, from accident or arson, among the rickety,
wind-swept, and thatch-roofed mansions of their neighbours; nor is there
any fact better established in connection with fires than that they are
used by thieves and anarchists for the purpose of sudden plunder and
disorder, at once upon the persons and property of the victims and
beholders of such catastrophes.

Let us suppose, for example, that as a consequence of this most alarming
incident at Samakoff, hostilities should ensue between Russia and
Austria, the former being the aggressor. In that case Germany—in virtue
of her published Treaty with the Hapsburg Monarchy—would almost
immediately have to take the field. Now, in such a contingency, is there
not a grave danger that France, seizing the golden opportunity for which
she has so long been waiting, would at once mobilise her army, and march
the greater part of it towards the Rhine? And is it not certain that the
immediate result of such a revengeful step on her part would be that
Italy, true likewise to her Treaty engagement with Germany, would make
haste to spring upon the flank of the Republic?

It is not well to forecast evils, but at the same time it is well to
look clearly ahead. We know surely enough the real nature of the
feelings with which the Bulgarians are regarded by their ‘Liberators,’
just as we are equally cognisant of the true character of those who
profess to be the Sultan’s ‘friends,’ and who, with the privilege of
most intimate amity, have repeatedly helped themselves to disintegrating
slices of his dominions. We need not remind our readers of that
bitterness which still rankles in the breasts of the Roumanians at the
memory of the manner in which they were ‘rewarded’ for services rendered
at the Gravitza Redoubt and elsewhere during the war against the Turks;
a bitterness which was only equalled by the rage of the Russians when
they recognised the supreme folly of their conduct in forcing Roumania
to accept the Dobrudja in exchange for Bessarabia, and thus depriving
themselves of a _pied à terre_ and strategical base of operations south
of the Danube, in the direction of the grand goal of their ultimate
ambition—the Golden Horn. It is as much the desire of Russia to undo
this unfortunate bargain as it is to shake herself free from the
intolerable shackles that restrain her liberty of action in the Black
Sea, and seal up the outlets thereof against her ships of war. Russia is
only awaiting a proper opportunity for accomplishing these two other
stages in what she deems to be her destiny (and does not everything come
to him who can wait?) just as she continues to pursue her anti-English
policy in Central Asia with steady, disdainful, unresisted strides, ever
lessening the distance between her own frontiers and those of India, and
thus paving the way for the execution of her policy of preventing the
forces of England from being thrown into the balance should any
complication arise in the East of Europe. ‘And ever,’ as Tennyson sang,
‘upon the topmost roof the banner of England blew;’ but that proud
banner has now, at last, been blown away by Cossack colonels from the
topmost roof of all—the ‘Roof of the World’ itself, thus enabling Russia
to overpeer our very Indian plains, and thence despatch her Calebs and
her Joshuas to spy out this other land of promise.

It may be quite true—and, indeed, from all we know of the character of
the Czar, we think it is quite true—that Alexander III. has a holy
horror of war, into which he is determined not to plunge his people; and
we have been assured by the greatest master of modern war, the late
Count Moltke, that the period of dynastic conflicts, or struggles
resulting from the personal passions and petulance of rulers, has come
to an end, and been succeeded by wars between peoples and nations. This
is also quite true; but it is precisely herein that the greatest danger
lurks. For a ruler—as witness the case of the present Czar’s own
father—may prove too weak to restrain or deflect the set of the popular
tide, and he plunged into a war against his own will. It is also
conceivable that the French Government might find it impossible to
resist the clamours of the Chamber to embrace the first opportunity—and
what could be a better one than a general European conflagration? for
ousting the English from Egypt—an object which all good Frenchmen deeply
have at heart. But it is on the Balkan Peninsula, where there are no
rulers or restraining influences to speak of, that popular passions and
aspirations must enjoy most unbridled sway; and therefore it is that we
look with anxiety for the further development of this tragic event at
Samakoff, which has already thrown the Balkan countries into a state of
wild excitement, and all Europe into a fit of ever-increasing alarm.


 (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Francis Scudamore._)

                                               PHILIPPOPOLIS, _April 4_.

(_Sunday Night._) I date this message from Philippopolis, whence indeed
it will be despatched on our arrival there to-morrow; but, as a matter
of fact, it is written in the sleeping car of a special train by which I
am travelling to Ichtiman _en route_ for Samakoff, in company with Drs.
Patterson, Stekoulis, and Lelongt, who have been invited by telegraph to
meet their Bulgarian colleagues in consultation at the bedside of the
wounded Prince. It is to these gentlemen’s courtesy that I owe the
privilege of my passage.

I am enabled, by the kindness of my friends at the United States
Legation, which, as is natural in the circumstances, has received minute
information as to the occurrence, to give you a fuller and more
authentic account of the Samakoff tragedy of yesterday by which Prince
Ferdinand of Bulgaria so nearly lost his life, than is likely to have
been transmitted as yet, and of which no doubt garbled first reports
have already thrown consternation into every European capital. I have
already stated that it is in the house of an American missionary that
Prince Ferdinand is at present lying. I must now explain that Samakoff,
which is nestled in the heart of a picturesque valley formed by the
rough triangle of the Kilo Dagh, the Kadir Tèré, and the De mir Kapou
Dagh at the head of the Balabancha range of Balkans, is not only one of
the wealthiest towns in the principality,—thanks to the iron mines by
which it is surrounded,—but is also famous and dear to Bulgarians by
reason of the presence there of the American Mission School, whose
principals rendered such devoted and signal service to the oppressed
Christians throughout the terrible time of the massacres of 1876 and the
war of 1877. At that time, when, as will be remembered, to be a
Bulgarian was all-sufficient reason for being summarily hanged (if a
man), or foully outraged (if a woman), the principal of the school and
his courageous wife snatched many victims from the gallows, and rescued
from a terrible fate, by harbouring in the mission-house, numerous young
girls and children, fugitives from the devastated villages of the Balkan
slopes. And when brighter days dawned for Bulgaria, and it became a
principality, the services of the American Mission at Samakoff were not
forgotten. It became a custom, inaugurated by Prince Alexander and
studiously maintained by his successor, for the Ruler of Bulgaria to
visit Samakoff in an informal manner once or twice a year, for the
purpose of inspecting the mission school and complimenting its
directors.

The snows which have held Samakoff isolated from the rest of the world
throughout the past four months, are now just melted, and thus it
chanced that Prince Ferdinand, who for a week past had been shooting in
the hills around Philippopolis, decided to pay his first visit of the
year to the missionaries of Samakoff, and had, unfortunately as it turns
out, announced his intention of so doing.

The Prince, with this purpose in view, left Philippopolis on Friday
evening, passing the night in his sleeping-car, and yesterday morning
started in a _calèche_ from Ichtiman-i-Vakarel, formerly the boundary
between Bulgaria and the province of Eastern Roumelia, to drive to the
little township in the mountains.

His Highness has usually been accompanied on these visits by one or
other of the ministers, but on this occasion, owing partly, no doubt, to
his hurriedly-formed plans, he had with him only one of the
aides-de-camp who had been of the shooting-party. The Prince’s carriage
was preceded by half-a-dozen mounted guards, and followed by a like
number, as an escort. This is a precaution which Prince Ferdinand’s
advisers have prevailed with him, much against his will, to adopt of
late, in view of the renewed activity of Russian agents and
sedition-mongers throughout the Principality and the neighbouring
States, where, indeed, a great anti-Bulgarian and anti-Turkish
propaganda has been actively carried on for the past year; and in view
also of the growing apprehension of his advisers that the recent success
in this city of assassins in Russian pay, coupled with the immunity from
punishment which the Czar’s representatives have shown their ability and
readiness to secure for them, would prompt the conspirators, soon or
late, to fly at higher game than either M. Stambuloff or the late Dr.
Vulkovitch. That his Highness’s advisers were in the right has been
proved by the attempt of yesterday. The event, however, may be said to
offer encouragement at once to would-be regicides and to their intended
victims, inasmuch as it has been shown yet once again to the former, how
useless as a protection against assassins is the presence of an armed
escort, and to the latter, how apt is a well-matured plot to be
frustrated by a commonplace accident.

The Prince’s carriage was expected to reach Samakoff about noon, and
shortly before that hour a considerable number of persons had collected
in the main street, while small crowds had gathered round the gates of
the Prefecture and about the door of the American Mission-house, which
is situated in a side street leading off the high road, and where the
usual modest preparations had been made for the princely visit.

His Highness, on arrival, after halting for a moment or two at the gate
of the Prefecture where he did not alight, drove on through the town
towards the Mission-house. At the moment when the carriage turned the
corner into the narrower street, a man wearing the long black gown and
brimless stovepipe hat of a priest of the orthodox church stood forward
from the crowd, in which were several other persons dressed as he was,
and, raising a revolver, took deliberate aim at his Highness. And then
occurred the accident to which, in all probability, Prince Ferdinand
owes his life. The cartridge did not explode. The sham priest lowered
his weapon slightly, raised it once more, and again pulled the trigger;
but as he did so the pistol barrel was struck up—the ball burying itself
in the wall of a house across the street—and the assassin was seized and
firmly held by many willing hands.

The whole occurrence had taken but a moment. The Prince, when he saw the
pistol levelled at him, had leapt to his feet, with the evident
intention of throwing himself upon his murderer. As it was, his
Highness’s intervention seemed very necessary on behalf of the baffled
assassin, who stood in no small danger of being lynched incontinently by
his furious captors.

The carriage had stopped; the escort was hastily dismounting, and the
Prince, shouting orders to the people to spare their prisoner’s life,
had alighted, and turning, was in the act of throwing his heavy pelisse
to his companion, when sudden as thought a second ruffian sprang from
amid the vociferating mob, hurled himself upon the Prince, and thrusting
a great, broad-bladed Circassian _khanga_ into his bosom, was away and
out of sight almost before any of the bystanders had recovered from this
second shock of horror and surprise.

His Highness, who had sunk to the ground under the blow, though he did
not lose consciousness, was at once carried into the Mission-house,
distant a few yards only, and very speedily all the best medical advice
obtainable in Samakoff was at hand, while telegrams for further
assistance were at once despatched to Sofia and to Philippopolis, the
latter place being perhaps more rapidly accessible than the capital. The
first examination of the wound showed that the broad knife had turned on
the point of a rib—very fortunately—and had therefore missed, by a
hair’s-breadth the envelope of the heart. It was not till to-day that a
persistent recurrence of internal hæmorrhage aroused the gravest fears
of the Prince’s surgeons, and prompted them to appeal to Constantinople
for further advice.

[Illustration:

  THE ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF PRINCE FERDINAND OF BULGARIA.
]

The pretended priest, when searched, was found to be costumed beneath
his robes in the ordinary dress of the petty trader of the towns here.
His long flowing locks proved a wig, and his thick unkempt beard was
also false. Upon him, among other papers said to be of great importance,
but as to which I know nothing, was found a passport issued by the
Russian Consulate at Odessa no less recently than last month, and
bearing the _visé_ of the Russian Chancellor at Sofia. The passport is
made out in the name of Ivan Bendukdjieff, and belongs, the fellow
avows, to a man, a stranger to him, who left it with him by mistake a
week ago. But the authorities entertain few doubts as to the scoundrel’s
identity with one of the men implicated with Shishmanoff in the recent
murder of Dr. Vulkovitch.

I have said that the news of this dastardly attempt on Prince
Ferdinand’s life caused the greatest excitement in Constantinople. There
is indeed no doubt that both the Palace and the Porte are very seriously
alarmed, as, in view of the Sultan’s disgraceful action in the
Vulkovitch affair, it is only just they should be. It is significant of
his Majesty’s state of mind that, when early this (Sunday) morning,
first the French and then the Russian Ambassador drove to the residence
of the Grand Vizier, they were unable to see him, orders having been
sent from Yildiz ordering the Pasha not to receive them. Sir Clare Ford,
on the other hand, had a long interview with the Sultan this morning.

                                               PHILIPPOPOLIS, _April 4_.

When the train steamed into the station here, I learned in the
restaurant, where every one was eagerly discussing the events of the
past two days, that the second assassin was captured yesterday afternoon
at Banja, as the result of an order widely circulated by both telegraph
and horse messengers throughout the country, calling upon all
Tchorbadjis, or headmen of villages, to detain any stranger found within
their jurisdiction, and at once communicate with the nearest central
authority. The man has been identified as one Nicholi Nāoum, a very
well-known character who, besides being suspected of participation in
the murder, last spring, of M. Beltcheff, is known to have been acting
for the past six months as a revolutionary agent on the Macedonian
frontier. Nāoum, who, as leader of a gang of border brigands, has gained
a bloody notoriety in connection with various dastardly outrages against
society, is believed to have been recently engaged in distributing arms
and ammunition among Macedonian villages, and in inciting the
Macedonians to molest the Bulgarians dwelling among them. Nāoum, when
arrested, was found to be provided, like his accomplice, with a Russian
passport executed in regular form. He was immediately carried back to
Samakoff and confronted with Bendukdjieff, against whom he at once began
to rail as a bungler, making no attempt to exonerate himself, or to deny
his share in the tragedy. In this course, perhaps, he was guided by the
knowledge that his life was already forfeited for many atrocious crimes
before he set his hand against Prince Ferdinand. As a consequence of his
last admission of guilt, a very brief trial was necessary, and the two
wretches were hanged this morning outside the house in which they had
lodged on Friday night in Samakoff.

[Illustration:

  M. STAMBULOFF

  Prime Minister of Bulgaria, appointed Regent after the attempted
    assassination of Prince Ferdinand.
]

The Prince is apparently doing well. M. Stambuloff, who, on receipt of
news of the disaster, hurried to his master’s bedside, remained but one
hour in Samakoff, during which time, despite the doctors, the Prince
insisted on seeing him, and returned direct to Sofia. Late on Saturday
night, at a meeting attended by most of the Ministers, hurriedly
convened, he was declared Regent during the serious illness of the
Prince, and for such time as might be necessary, and the formal
proclamation in accordance with this decision was issued yesterday
morning.

                                                       SOFIA, _April 6_.

Instead of accompanying Dr. Patterson and his colleagues on a, to me,
fruitless expedition to Samakoff, I bid them good-bye at Ichtiman, where
they left the train, and came on here. As might be expected, I have
found this city boiling with tumultuous emotions, and not only—though
that were sufficient cause—on account of the outrageous attempt on
Prince Ferdinand’s life.

It appears that the Cabinet has received news of the greatest importance
from the Macedonian frontier. The assiduous efforts of Russian agents,
who have been actively engaged for the past six months or more not only
in the provinces itself, but also in the Greek and Montenegrin borders,
in fomenting an anti-Bulgarian rising, are now on the eve of being
crowned with success. Already reports have reached the capital of
disturbances, caused apparently by raids made across the border at
Petrovich and Melnik. That there is a great shifting of troops at
present in progress as a result of this intelligence, is not denied. It
is said, indeed, though I cannot as yet tell with what truth, that a
half division has been ordered to Petrovich, and another like force to
Strumnitza. The latest rumour here is to the effect that the movement in
Macedonia is as much anti-Turkish as anti-Bulgarian, and that Turkey is
also despatching a large military force to Salonika. If this report be
true, it is surely an instance of the irony of fate. In this country it
is a matter of common talk that any anti-Bulgarian movement in Macedonia
is mainly due to the attitude of Zuknir Pasha, the Vali of Salonika,
towards the large Bulgarian element of the population of the province
under his control. This functionary’s persistent ill-treatment of
Bulgarians has been very frequently represented to the Porte in notes
from this capital as being contrary at once to the interests of Turkey
and of Bulgaria. The Principality, it has been said, has consistently
refused to take side with those who seek the dismemberment of Turkey,
and has claimed a right to expect that the development of the Bulgarian
element in Macedonia would not be crushed by Pashas who, by their
arbitrary actions, paralyse the intentions of the central government,
and prepare the way for events which had better, in the common interest,
be avoided. It is needless to say these sensible warnings have been
altogether disregarded by the Porte, with the present inevitable result.

[Illustration:

  THE BULGARIAN MOBILISATION—TROOPS MARCHING THROUGH THE STREETS OF
    PHILIPPOPOLIS.
]

It is further rumoured here—for the place is full of suspicion—that in
view of certain movements of Servian troops, a large Bulgarian force has
been hurriedly thrown forward to strengthen the troops at Radomir, Trn,
and Zaribrod.

                                                       SOFIA, _April 8_.

The latest reports as to Prince Ferdinand are more favourable than could
have been hoped for. The dangerous symptoms have subsided. Internal
hæmorrhage has been checked. The Prince sleeps and takes nourishment,
and his pulse and temperature are satisfactory. Hopes are held out that
in a week’s time His Highness may be moved from Samakoff. Meanwhile,
during the past few days, events have marched so rapidly that people
here are prepared for almost any eventuality. There is no longer any
attempt to conceal the movements of Servian troops. Great numbers of men
are already massed at Nisch and Vranja, and at points on the line of
railway between Nisch and Pirot. The main body of the Servian army has
its headquarters at Knuzevatz. From Belgrade, we learn of the steady
despatch of war material and siege-train to Negotin on the frontier
against Widdin, and a telegram from the same source announces the
arrival at Nisch of a train of the Red Cross Society, consisting of
eighteen carriages furnished with all the necessary equipment for active
service.

News from Constantinople is to the effect that the Porte, alarmed at the
aspect of affairs in Macedonia, has, in addition to the calling out of
the last class of rediffs, decided on the formation of five new Army
Corps. Fresh levies are to be made in order to form a strong reserve.
The transport of rediffs, mainly from Smyrna, Skanderoun, and the
Tripolitaine, is being carried on on a large scale. Over 27,000
reservists have already passed through Smyrna. Many of the Austrian
Lloyd vessels being engaged in the transport of troops to Salonika to
guard the frontier line and to reinforce the Bitolia garrison, the
Seraskierate is negotiating with some English shipping companies for
additional transport. More than fifty thousand troops are to be employed
on the Macedonian border in a line stretching from Mitrovitza on the
north, all round to Raslok on the south-east. Their chief stations will
be Palanka, with Uskub as base, and Djuma and Neurokoy with Strumdja as
base. No further disturbances are reported from the frontier.

[Illustration:

  THE SERVO-BULGARIAN CAMPAIGN—THROUGH PIROT TO THE FRONT.
]

M. Stambuloff left here last night to inspect the troops on the
frontier. I am, of course, unable to give any information as to their
numbers or disposition, but it may be said that Bulgaria is well
prepared to resist any attack. It is infringing no rule to say that the
Prince’s army possesses no fewer than 400 pieces of ordnance of all
calibres. The report that his appointment as Regent has met with
disapprobation among a large section of the community here is absolutely
without foundation.

A trusted agent of the Government has also left here for Berlin, for the
purpose, it is understood, of raising a loan in that capital.

                                                      SOFIA, _April 10_.

We are now at war, and fighting is going forward even as I write. This
morning rifle-shots were exchanged between Servian and Bulgarian
patrolling parties on the frontier, near Trn, without result on either
side. A body of some 300 Servians then crossed the frontier and advanced
about a mile, seeking to cut off a party of fifty Bulgarians, who,
however, retreated and escaped. Later on heavy fighting was reported in
the neighbourhood of Vlassina. How it originated is immaterial. The
Bulgarians lost 17 men killed and 54 wounded. This set fire to the torch
all along the frontier line. Some time before the official declaration
of war, which, though it announced that hostilities would begin at noon
to-day, did not reach the Minister for Foreign Affairs here until nine
o’clock this evening, reports had been posted up in the cafés announcing
fighting in the vicinity of Planinitza, Beuskedol, Miloslawtzi, Zelene,
and Gard, in the Trn district. The Servian Minister, who had twice
telegraphed to his Government for instructions during the afternoon,
demanded a special train as soon as he had presented the declaration of
war, and left half an hour later, under escort, for the frontier.

A solemn _Te Deum_ was sung this evening in the Cathedral, M. Stambuloff
and the Ministers being present. The streets are crowded—no one shows
any intention of going to bed; the popular enthusiasm and confidence are
immense, and there is apparently a general sensation of relief at the
relaxation of the strain of the past few days, and a feeling of
satisfaction that the dastardly attack on the Prince will be promptly
avenged. I am, by the way, authorised to state that, by order of Prince
Ferdinand’s physicians, all news of these exciting events is rigidly
withheld from his Highness.

Fresh troops are hourly leaving Sofia and Philippopolis for the front.

[Illustration:

  AN AFFAIR OF OUTPOSTS—THE FIRST SHOT IN THE SERVO-BULGARIAN CAMPAIGN.
]

At the moment of closing this despatch, news comes of an important
action near Dragoman, with reported defeat of the Servians with heavy
losses.

                                                      SOFIA, _April 11_.

There is to be no more fighting. The brilliant and most sanguinary
engagement at Dragoman, which I reported in progress last night, in the
course of which the Bulgarians, who were completely successful, drove
the enemy back from all their positions on the heights above the pass:
an incessant artillery duel, maintained ever since the commencement of
hostilities between the heavy Servian batteries before Negotin and the
Bulgarian forces garrisoning Widelin, and a very successful unopposed
advance along the Vranja road as far as the Morava river by a Bulgarian
force, composed of three brigades from Sofia, from Trn, and from
Radomir, make up all there is to report of the campaign. For when
hostilities were about to be opened this morning near Kumareno, which
was evidently held by a large Servian force, an officer bearing a white
towel, with a pink fringe, tied to a hedge stake, as a flag of truce,
rode out from the Servian lines and demanded a _pourparler_. It then
transpired that the Servians found themselves in a terrible quandary,
and were at their wits’ end what to do.

Late last night a large Austrian force had, without warning, crossed the
Save into Belgrade, which city they had taken so completely by surprise
that it was not until the morning that the populace was made aware of
the presence of the strangers in their midst by the sight of the troops
bivouacking in the squares, and the officers quietly breakfasting
outside the principal cafés. An Austrian force, said the parlementaire,
had also crossed the Danube to Semendria, and there were rumours that
another force had crossed the same river at Orsova. In these
circumstances, with their capital cut off from them, and their young
king and government in a manner locked up, the Servian generals
considered they had no alternative but to demand a suspension of
hostilities, at least for forty-eight hours. An armistice was therefore
granted, much to the Bulgarian leaders’ annoyance and disgust.

We learn that Austria has notified the Powers that she has occupied
Semendria and Belgrade as a precautionary measure, in view of the wanton
aggression of Servia.

It is here considered unlikely that Bulgaria will have any more trouble
from this quarter. On the other hand, however, grave rumours reach us
from Constantinople, where apparently there is very great anxiety as to
certain mysterious and as yet undefined threats by Russia. The Turkish
capital is, as matters stand at present, likely to be the chief centre
of interest for some time to come, and I shall therefore return there
to-morrow morning.

[Illustration:

  THE OCCUPATION OF BELGRADE—‘HERE AT LAST!’
]

All through the day long trains of Bulgarian and Servian wounded have
crept one after another into Sofia. It is noteworthy that a considerable
percentage of the sufferers are bright and lively and make light of
their injuries. These are men who have been struck by the small nickel
bullets of the new rifle, which has been used in pretty equal
proportions on both sides.

                                             CONSTANTINOPLE, _April 15_.

There is no doubt good cause for the grave fears at present agitating
Porte and Palace. By his foolishly near-sighted policy of pandering to
the wishes of whatsoever Power bullies him with most brutal persistency,
at the risk though it be of injuring a friendly State, the Sultan has,
as he is beginning to realise, succeeded in alienating, for the moment
at least, the sympathies of all his legitimate friends. By his
attitude—wilfully perverse and undignified—throughout the varying phases
of the Vulkovitch episode, his Majesty has aroused throughout Bulgaria
deep distrust of himself, and fierce indignation against his ministers
and his methods. The inane and futile strivings of the Porte to throw
difficulties in the path of the young Khedive, and to cheat him, if
possible, of rights clearly accorded and amply paid for, have produced
similar sentiments in Egypt and in England. And having, at the cost of
much labour and intrigue, achieved this wholly unsatisfactory position
of being an object of contempt, suspicion, and obloquy, the Sultan finds
himself suddenly but decidedly thrown over by the very Powers with whom
he had sought to curry favour. The Russian Ambassador is now too
thoroughly pre-occupied with the immediate policy of his own Government
to have any further care to wear gloves in his dealings with the Porte,
and his mood has so affected M. Cambon, the French Ambassador, that that
astute personage, unable to find those sweet professions and gracious
persuasion—half unmeaning promise, half veiled threat with which he has
been wont to _dorloter_ the Ministers at Bab Aali—come readily to his
tongue, has ceased for a fortnight past to hold any other than mere
chancellerie communication with the Turkish Government.

Let it be said at once that, despite very natural indignation, Bulgaria
shows every disposition to behave well towards the Suzerain Power.
Officially, indeed, her attitude has been in every way admirable. When
the Servians opened hostilities, when they declared war, when they asked
for an armistice—in every phase, in short, of the quarrel, M. Stambuloff
apprised, and asked counsel and aid of, the Sultan. To be sure he got
nothing for his pains, but it must have been a satisfaction to the
Sultan to receive proof that, in one quarter at any rate, he is not
regarded as a European Power of merely sentimental importance.

                                             CONSTANTINOPLE, _April 16_.

Fresh alarm was caused here this morning by the discovery that our
telegraphic communication has been interrupted at once with Odessa and
with Batoum. All inquiries as to the cause of the rupture made by other
routes failed to elicit any explanation. Later in the day a vessel of
the Cunard line arrived in the Bosphorus, and her captain has stated
that the Russian harbour-master at Odessa is detaining all ships, of
whatever nationality, in that port. His own vessel, he says, was the
last to leave Odessa, and only got away by a chance, the order having
reached him when he had already got under way. He states that there were
several Russian ironclads, and quite a fleet of torpedo boats at Odessa,
all with steam up, and says that when he was on shore there the day
before yesterday the town was full of soldiers, and the approaches to
the dockyards crowded with a constantly-increasing mass of guns, horses,
ammunition, and other war material.

                                             CONSTANTINOPLE, _April 18_.

I have received a telegram from my correspondent in Sofia, who tells me
that the Bulgarian Government understands that the Russians are
preparing an expedition for sea at Odessa, and intend to occupy some
portion of Bulgarian territory. The Princely Government has reason to
expect the attack will be directed against Varna, and has called upon
the Sultan to aid Bulgarian arms by sending his fleet to guard the Varna
roads. The Sultan has as yet made no reply to this request, says my
correspondent, but it is not difficult to guess what His Majesty’s
action will be, inasmuch as Turkey has no single ship of war in
condition to be got to sea under a month at the least, and it is more
than questionable whether even then any of the ironclads could be
completely manned or provided with serviceable ammunition. There are,
indeed, some torpedo boats—unprovided, I understand, with torpedoes—and
a couple of the monitors that did some service in the Danube in the last
war. If the Admiralty should elect to place these vessels at the service
of the Bulgarian Government, they might be of some use as scouts. But
that is about all that Turkey can hope to do for her vassal.

[Illustration:

  WITH THE TURKS: ADMIRAL WOODS PACHA’S FLEET OF TORPEDO BOATS STEAMING
    THROUGH THE BOSPHORUS.
]

Here there is terrible anxiety lest the Russian expedition be directed,
not against Varna or Bourgas, but against the Kavaks, and the
Seraskierate is busily taking precautions to meet such a contingency
with all the forces available.

Despite the recent draining of the Stamboul camp by the despatch of a
large force to Salonika, there are still some 45,000 men in and around
the capital. These, with the exception of the Sultan’s guard of about
15,000 men, have been distributed along the chain of forts extending
from Roumelie Kavak to the Golden Horn. The telegraph is kept busily at
work summoning troops from all parts of the Empire. 15,000 men from the
Adrianople garrison are expected to arrive here to-night.

The Russian Ambassador is said to be ill. He has not left the Embassy in
the Grand Rue de Pera for now almost a week, and refuses to receive any
one. Even his French colleague found the door closed to him yesterday.

[Illustration:

  RUSSIAN INFANTRY LANDING AT VARNA.
]

                                             CONSTANTINOPLE, _April 19_.

A Russian force, variously computed at from 50,000 to 70,000 men,
occupied Varna this morning. There was some smart resistance, but the
comparatively small Bulgarian force was powerless against the heavy
metal of the Russian fleet, and after an hour’s fighting was compelled
to abandon the position.

Coincident with the receipt of this news is the delivery of a note by
the Russian Ambassador—suddenly restored to health—to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, setting forth that, as a result of the extraordinary
and uncalled-for position taken up by Austria, the Czar’s Government
feels the necessity of acquiring a material guarantee for the
maintenance of peace, and will therefore effect a peaceful occupation of
Bourgas and Varna with that end in view.




              RUSSIAN MOVEMENT UPON THE AUSTRIAN FRONTIER.


      MOBILISATION OF GERMAN ARMY CORPS—WILD EXCITEMENT IN BERLIN.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                         BERLIN, _April 21_ (8.50 P.M.).

Never since the fateful days of July 1870 has so much excitement been
caused here as by the news—which now seems to be beyond all doubt—that
Russia, having received an evasive, or, as other telegrams put it, a
flatly negative reply to her peremptory demand for the immediate
evacuation of Belgrade by the Austrians, has already begun to move down
immense masses of troops towards her south-western frontier; and it is
even rumoured that a division of cavalry has suddenly made its
appearance near the border, on the Warsaw-Cracow road, at a place called
Xiaswielki. This is a grave situation, indeed, as alarming as it is
sudden. The Unter den Linden, which is a perfect Babel with the bawling
voices of the newsvendors, is rapidly filling with crowds rushing
hither, as to the main channel of intelligence, from all parts of the
city, and the Foreign Office in the Wilhelm-Strasse is besieged by a
huge throng clamouring to hear the truth.

For on this depends the issue of peace or war for Germany. Let but
Russia lay one single finger of aggression on Austria, and Germany must
at once unsheath her sword and spring to her ally’s aid. Pray let there
be no mistake as to the terms of the Austro-German Treaty of 1879, which
was published a year or two ago, for it has often been misinterpreted.
Under this instrument a _casus fœderis_ does not arise for Germany in
all and any circumstances of a war between Russia and Austria, but only
in the event of the former being the aggressor; and it looks very much
as though Russia were now seriously bent on taking the offensive. Does
she really mean to do this? is the question on every one’s lips here,
and the excitement of people is equal to their suspense. It is known
that an active correspondence by wire is proceeding between here and
Vienna, but the authorities are very reticent, and only beg the crowds
to keep calm and hope for the best.

                                                                  9 P.M.

I have just returned from the Schloss, whither the multitude, which
was unable to gratify its curiosity at the Foreign Office, had surged
along to pursue its eager inquiries, but only to find that the Emperor
was closeted with his Chancellor, General Count von Caprivi, and his
Chief of the Staff, Count von Schlieffen. It was remarked that when
both these magnates emerged from their interview with His Majesty, and
drove off at a rapid rate, they looked very serious and pre-occupied,
paying but little heed to the cheering which greeted their appearance.
This only tended to deepen the apprehension of the vast crowd in front
of the Schloss, whose fears were further augmented by a rumour (a true
one, as I found on tracing it to its source), which spread like
lightning, that the Emperor had telegraphed for the King of Saxony,
Prince Albrecht of Prussia, Prince-Regent of Brunswick—both
Field-Marshals—as also for Count Waldersee, Commander of the Ninth
Army Corps in Schleswig-Holstein, whom the Emperor, it may be
remembered, when parting with this distinguished officer, as Chief of
the General Staff, publicly designated as the Commander of a whole
army in the event of war.

                                                                 10 P.M.

After despatching my last message, which I had the utmost difficulty in
doing owing to the frantic mass of newspaper correspondents of all
nationalities struggling desperately into and out of the Telegraph
Office, I had the good fortune to meet Baron von Marschall, the amiable
and accomplished Foreign Secretary, who favoured me with a brief
conversation on the momentous subject of the hour. Yes, he said, it was
unfortunately quite true that the Russians were rapidly concentrating
their forces towards the Austro-German frontier, and that a sotnia of
prying Cossacks, coming from Tarnogrod, had even pushed forward on the
Austrian side of the border towards Jaroslav, an important railway
junction point in Galicia. He had just received intelligence to this
effect from Prince Reuss, the German Ambassador in Vienna, who added
that things indeed looked their very worst. ‘But this,’ I remarked, ‘is
an act of invasion on the part of Russia, is it not, and means war?’ The
Baron shook his head ominously, and, with a kindly ‘come and see me
again to-morrow morning,’ squeezed my hand and hurried off to see Count
Syéchényi at the Austrian Embassy, which stands over against the former
home of M. Benedetti, with all its associations connected with the
beginning of Germany’s last great war.

On my way back to the Telegraph Office, where I write this, I
encountered, just at the entrance to the Russian Embassy, Unter den
Linden, its genial and honest occupant, Count Schouvaloff, who was good
enough to return my greeting by motioning me to stop, and telling me
that he had just been to see Count Caprivi, and assure him, on the part
of his Imperial master, that all these warlike preparations in Western
Poland implied no menace whatever to Germany, with whom Russia had not
the least cause of quarrel, but that, nevertheless, so long as Austria
threatened to derange the balance of power in the Balkan Peninsula for
her own selfish ends, Russia would be incriminating herself in the eyes
of history if she stood by with folded hands and sought not to safeguard
her most vital interests by all the means at her disposal. And as Pitt
had created a new world to redress the balance of the old, so Russia was
now compelled to re-establish equilibrium in one part of the Eastern
Continent of Europe by giving the would-be disturber of this equilibrium
work enough to engross all his attention in another. ‘These were not, of
course, the very words,’ added the Count, ‘which I used to the
Chancellor, but they express the exact sense of my communication.’

                                                               MIDNIGHT.

Berlin, which has poured all its teeming million-and-a-half into the
streets, is at this hour a scene of the wildest excitement, owing to a
rumour (and a friend of mine in the General Staff, whom I chanced to
meet, confirmed the truth of the rumour), that the awful and
electrifying words ‘_Krieg, mobil!_’ had (as in 1870) been already
flashed again to no fewer than seven of the twenty Army Corps
constituting the Imperial host—viz., to the 1st, or East Prussian; the
17th, West Prussian; the 3d, Brandenburg; the 4th, Province of Prussian
Saxony; the 5th, Posen; the 6th, Silesian; and the 12th, Kingdom of
Saxony.

Loud and long was the cheering in front of the Schloss—which is thronged
by an ever-increasing and excited multitude—when this intelligence oozed
out, and with one accord (for your Germans are a most wonderful people
of trained choral-singers) the whole mighty assemblage burst forth with
a battle-ballad, in which some deft patriotic poet had been quick to
embody the fears and determinations of the last few days under the title
of ‘_Die Weichsel-Wacht_,’ or the ‘Watch on the Vistula’—a war-song
which promises to fill as large and luminous a page among the lyric gems
of the Fatherland as Schneckenburger’s immortal ‘_Wacht am Rhein_.’ When
the frantic cheering which followed the chanting of this stirring
battle-anthem had subsided, the Emperor (who has now completely
recovered from the accident to his knee) came out to bow his
acknowledgments from the front balcony of the castle; and on his arm was
the Empress holding the hand of the pretty little flaxen-haired Crown
Prince, who had been routed out of his warm bed at this late and chilly
hour to add one crowning touch of spectacular effect to the _tableau_
which, amid another frenzied outburst of ‘hochs’ and ‘hurrahs,’ thus
closed the drama of a most exciting and momentous day.




      INTERVIEW BETWEEN GENERAL CAPRIVI AND THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR.

                   DISPOSITION OF THE GERMAN TROOPS.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                     BERLIN, _April 23_.

The excitement of the last few days has now calmed down into the serious
and stolid determination, which is the most striking characteristic of
the German race, and though it is known that, since the order to
mobilise seven Army Corps was issued, M. Herbette, the French
Ambassador, has had repeated interviews with General Caprivi, the nation
is meanwhile content to suppress its suspicion with regard to the
possible—nay, probable—policy of its western neighbour, and devote all
its attention to the development of events on its eastern border.

Certain official telegrams which I have been allowed to peruse leave
little doubt that, while the Russians are making a show of massing
troops in the direction of Cracow, the real line of their strategic
advance is towards the Lemberg side, whence a railway leads across the
Carpathians to Buda-Pesth. It is argued here that, had the Russians
merely to deal with Austria alone, the likeliest line of their advance
would be by way of Cracow and its fortress, which they would endeavour
to turn, and then strike for Vienna by the route which has been deemed,
on the whole, the easier for them, namely, that which leads to the
valley of the Danube across Austrian Silesia, and through the gap
between the Bohemian and Carpathian mountains. But with a German army
massed in Silesia, and menacing their right flank, the advantages of
this route would be more than countervailed, and so the Russians seem to
have chosen an invading route as remote as possible from the German base
of attack, namely, _viâ_ Lemberg and Stryj.

Meanwhile the mobilisation of the seven German Army Corps, enumerated by
me in a previous despatch, is in full swing, the reserve men hastening
to the colours with great alacrity; and as the railways are working
night and day, all public traffic being suspended, the troops will soon
be in the various positions assigned them. The 12th, or Royal Saxon
Corps, it seems, is to be sent over to strengthen the Austrians, which
will appear a wise and tactful disposition, when it is remembered how
the Saxons fought shoulder to shoulder with the Austrians at Königgrätz;
while Field-Marshal Prince George (brother of the King of Saxony) has
been intrusted by the Emperor with the command of what is to be called
the Army of Silesia, consisting of the 5th and 6th Corps, now swiftly
concentrating between Breslau (which, being at present an open town, is
undergoing rapid circumvallation by a ring of earthwork forts armed with
Schumann gun-turrets) and Neisse, the Prussian Crown Prince’s point of
departure for Bohemia in 1866. On the other hand, a Second Army,
consisting of the 3d and 4th Corps, to be called ‘of the Vistula,’ and
to be commanded by the King of Saxony, is swiftly massing round Thorn,
that Metz of the East; while a Third Army, compounded of the 1st and
17th Corps (East and West Prussia), and denominated ‘of the Baltic,’ has
been assigned to Count Waldersee, and is fast taking position on the
line flanked by the fortresses of Königsberg and Lötzen, the task
assigned to it being evidently an invasion of the Baltic Provinces and
the consequent splitting up and diversion of the Russian forces from
their southern objective. As to the First and Second German Armies
(those of Silesia and the Vistula), a glance at the map will show that,
roughly speaking, they form the base ends of a triangle whereof Warsaw
is the apex, and that a well-timed advance by road or rail, for both are
available, would enable them to effect a junction (on Moltke’s principle
of marching separately and fighting combined, as applied with such
brilliant success at Sadowa), and give decisive battle to the Russians
somewhere near Warsaw.

But I may not indulge at present in a more detailed forecast of the
impending campaign and its incidents. Suffice to say that the Germans
promise to keep General Gourko, commanding the Russian forces in Poland,
quite as busy as General Dragomiroff, commander at Kieff, and chief
director of the operations against Galicia, will be kept by the
Austrians themselves on their particular side of the seat of war.




                    DEPARTURE OF TROOPS TO THE EAST.

                      ‘THE WATCH ON THE VISTULA.’


                                                     BERLIN, _April 24_.

I hear that the Guard Corps is also about to be mobilised as a
precautionary measure. This will, of course, be followed by similar
orders to all the rest of the German Army should France assume a
threatening attitude, and the signs that she means to do this are
increasingly ominous.

Meanwhile, the armies of the East are pouring towards the frontier with
machine-like order and rapidity. All night and all day long,
heavily-laden trains conveying the troops of the 4th Corps have been
passing through Berlin, one at the tail of the other, towards Thorn; and
there was tremendous cheering this afternoon at the Central Station,
which is littered about with beer barrels and piles of edibles offered
by the citizens for the refreshment and encouragement of the ‘_tapfere
Krieger_’ who are going at last to measure their strength with the
Muscovites, when the Bismarck Cuirassiers from Halberstadt steamed
slowly up to the platform for a stoppage just long enough to let the
couple of powerful engines water. Rolls and sausages were showered into
the carriages containing these splendid heavy troopers (in whose ranks,
by the way, Lieutenant Campbell of Craignish, a young Argyllshire
laird—now Rittmeister, like Dugald Dalgetty, and _aide-de-camp_ to the
Grand Duke of Coburg-Gotha—had captured a French eagle at Mars-la-Tour);
and when their heavy train again began to move away there arose another
ringing cheer mingled with ‘Hochs’ for Bismarck (and I wonder how the
exile of Friedrichsruh feels at the contemplation of all this!)—cheers
and ‘hochs’ that were responded to by these big, deep-chested fellows
roaring out the ‘Watch on the Vistula,’ which has already spread like
wildfire throughout the nation, and kindled its heart into a fine
warlike glow.




                        BANQUET IN THE SCHLOSS.

                     OMINOUS SPEECH BY THE EMPEROR.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                     BERLIN, _April 25_.

To-night the Emperor gave a grand military banquet in the White Saloon
of the Schloss previous to his starting for Thorn—that tremendous
bulwark on the Vistula over against the Russian frontier, where the work
of concentrating the German troops is proceeding rapidly. At this
banquet I was favoured with a seat in the gallery, from which I have
witnessed so many pomps and pageants at this Court; and when the third
course had been reached, His Majesty (who wore the gala uniform of the
Gardes du Corps) rose, and, amid a silence in which you might have even
heard the fall of a hair, addressed his guests as follows, in a most
resolute and rasping voice:—

‘_Meine Herren_, God has willed it that Germany should draw her sword in
defence of her ally, and to God’s high, holy will we all must bow.
German loyalty (‘_Deutsche Treue_’) has ever been one of the most
conspicuous virtues of our race, and, if we now failed to prove true to
our treaty engagements, we should justly deserve to become a mockery and
a bye-word among the nations. Remembering, as I do, the very last words
almost which were addressed to me by my beloved grandfather, now resting
in God, who conjured me to be considerate towards and cultivate the
friendship of Russia, it is with a heart full of exceeding heaviness
that I look forward to the events that are ahead of us. Nevertheless, it
shall be in the power of no one to say that the German Government was
ever wanting in fidelity, or the German army deficient in courage.

‘Gentlemen, that courage has been displayed on a thousand glorious
battle-fields, and never more so than in those stupendous and heroic
encounters which made of us a great and united nation—a nation whereof
the safety and integrity would be gravely imperilled by disaster,
involving, perhaps, disruption to the dual monarchy of our allies. Such
a result, gentlemen, we cannot endure; and it is to obviate the bare
possibility of such a thing that we are now about to respond to the
solemn call of treaty obligations, by placing some of our heroic troops
side by side with the brave army of my august friend and ally, His
Majesty the Emperor Francis-Joseph; nor is it to be doubted that this
companionship-in-arms, among other things, will have the blessed effect
of wiping out all memory of our past conflicts and estrangements, and of
re-uniting, in the bonds of fraternal love and loyalty, the two greatest
sections of the mighty and invincible German race.

‘_Meine Herren_, God is above us, but uncertainty, to some extent, is
before us. Within the last few years the science of war has been
completely revolutionised, and we are all now about to grapple with
military problems which never taxed the powers of our predecessors. As
the Supreme War-Lord (‘_oberste Kriegs-Herr_’) of our armies, I mean to
make inspection of such of our forces as are now marshalling themselves
on our Eastern marches and also to remain at their head unless—which God
forfend!—the course of events should call me elsewhere. (Sensation.)

‘But, gentlemen, I do not require to tell you that the duties and
functions of a commander are very different now from what they were at
the beginning of this century, not to speak of the time of my invincible
and immortal ancestor, Frederick the Great, who inspired his troops by
his very presence and directed them _in_ battle; whereas now all that is
nearly left to the modern commander-in-chief is to lead his forces up
_to_ battle and then leave them to the charge of his subordinates—an era
in the science of warfare which was inaugurated by that great scientific
soldier, lately, alas! taken from us, who has written his deathless name
in indelible letters of gold on the tablets of his country’s history.

‘Forbidden by the nature and necessities of warfare, as now practised,
to be a tactician—such as Cæsar, or Frederick, or Napoleon, or
Wellington—the modern commander-in-chief must restrict himself to the
task of strategy, and intrust his colonels and his captains with the
duty of beating the enemy in detail. And as a modern battle must
necessarily stretch over a vast extent of front, it really resolves
itself into a hundred separate combats, in which even company leaders
become independent commanders; and thus, gentlemen, to all of you there
is opened up a glorious prospect of doing your duty to your country and
achieving a distinction which was reserved to the generalissimos of
yore. But though thus every colonel and every captain among you is now a
commander-in-chief, it behoves you to remember that, what with smokeless
powder, magazine rifles of vast range, and other innovations, the
conditions of fighting have altered immensely even since Germany last
took the field; but I doubt not that you will all prove true to our
highest traditions, and that our brave army, with God’s blessing, will
once more show the stuff of which it is made.

‘Gentlemen, this is a solemn moment, and it is not in a spirit of
festive mirth, but rather under the influence of the serious feelings
which dominate us all, that I ask you to drain your glasses to the
health of my august ally, His Majesty Francis-Joseph, Emperor of
Austria-Hungary. Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah!’

To-morrow the Emperor will leave for the frontier, and I have been
graciously permitted by His Majesty to attach myself to his
Headquarter-Staff.


                 DEPARTURE OF THE EMPEROR FOR THE EAST.

                                                     BERLIN, _April 26_.

It is long since the Linden Avenue witnessed such a scene of crowding
and excitement as it presented to-day, when the Emperor (who wore the
drill uniform of his Silesian Bodyguard Cuirassiers, named of the Great
Elector), drove from the Schloss to the Central Station to take train
for Thorn. His Majesty was accompanied by the Empress, who looked very
sad, where her august husband only wore a serious mien. The fine sunny
weather, balmy already with the fragrance of the budding spring, had
lured thousands and thousands into the streets to see the away-going of
the Emperor on his first campaign; and it was only with great difficulty
that the demi-squadron of cavalry (Gardes du Corps) escorting the
Imperial victoria could advance through the packed and cheering masses
of people who thronged every inch of standing-space in Unter den Linden,
and reached up to the very house-tops.

At one point of its route, just opposite Café Bauer, the Emperor’s
carriage was even brought to a stop; and it was then that a very excited
gentleman (who turned out to be an American admirer of His Majesty)
profited by the opportunity to throw a laurel wreath into the Imperial
equipage. Quick as thought, the Emperor placed the wreath on the point
of his sword-scabbard and tossed it back to his adulator, saying with a
smile, ‘Wait a little, my friend; let us earn this first’—a sally that
was the signal for a perfect storm of cheers on the part of the
witnesses of this charming incident, which furnished them with
additional reason for lauding the Emperor’s modesty and good sense.

There was much cheering, hat-waving and fluttering of handkerchiefs
as their Imperial Majesties—who never ceased bowing their
acknowledgments—threaded their way to the station, on the platform
of which was assembled Headquarter-Staff, with the great Household
officers and Ministers of State (who looked very grave indeed), and
others whom duty or curiosity had brought to see the Emperor off.
After conversing for a few minutes with Count Caprivi (who, unlike
his predecessor in office, is not to go to the front in the
meantime, pending the development of French schemes), His Majesty
turned to his sad-eyed consort, whom he embraced with great warmth,
and then entered his travelling saloon carriage. In another moment,
amid three parting ‘hochs,’ the train had glided away, carrying with
it the first German Emperor who has unsheathed his sword against the
Czar of all the Russias.




      ILL-TREATMENT OF A WAR-CORRESPONDENT BY THE GERMAN HUSSARS.

                         THE BIVOUAC AT THORN.

                   SIGNIFICANT REMARK OF THE EMPEROR.


     (_By Post from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                      THORN, _April 27_.

Following the route taken by the Emperor, I arrived here this morning,
thanks to the courtesy of Baron von Tauchnitz (a son of the great
Leipzig publisher of the well-known Continental edition of our English
classics), who kindly allowed me a place (it was only a standing one) in
the train conveying to the front the Magdeburg Artillery Regiment of his
command, as well as the Train, or Army Service, Battalion of the 4th
Corps.

While crossing the bridge from the railway station to claim the quarters
that had been assigned me at the ‘Black Bear,’ my eye and ear were
suddenly struck by a strange hubbub going on below. A troop of
red-tunic’d Zieten Hussars (‘Duke of Connaught’s’) were watering their
horses in the Vistula, which has here a broad, placid, and majestic
course; and while these thirsty animals were revelling in delicious
draughts of the first water they had tasted since leaving Rathenow
(their garrison townlet, near Bismarck’s native place), their riders
were amusing themselves by roaring and laughing at the frantic efforts
of what seemed to me to be a big Newfoundland dog to extricate himself
from the stream. Presently the poor brute, which to my great
astonishment gradually assumed human shape, struggled, spluttering and
gasping, on to the shelving bank; and then it was that I recognised in
this buffeted and bedraggled creature, Solomon Hirsch, the well-known
correspondent of the _Berliner Tageblatt_, whose shock head of hair, all
touzled and dishevelled, had given him the semblance of canine form and
feature alluded to. It appears that poor Hirsch, fulfilling his
functions with more zeal than discretion, had already made himself an
object of universal execration at the front by communicating to his
paper most minute details as to the massing and position of the German
troops towards the Russian frontier, and that being recognised by these
rollicking and resentful Zieten Hussar fellows, to whom he had, in an
evil moment for himself, appealed for information as to their ultimate
destination, this ‘curse of modern armies’ was at once set upon,
hilariously tossed in a horse-rug, and then contemptuously heaved into
the Vistula. I have made a point of dwelling on this serio-comic
incident, which I myself was quick to take to heart, as it will serve to
explain the absence from my telegrams of all but the most meagre and
general references to the positions and movements of the German troops;
and, indeed, I should be worthy the fate of my hapless colleague did I
abuse the hospitality which has been so graciously extended to me by
revealing unexecuted plans.

Indeed, I have only been promised the use of the field and other
telegraph wires on the strict condition that my messages never exceed a
limited number of words, which will necessarily restrict my reports to
the briefest and barest, yet, I trust, sufficient summaries.

The Emperor (who was accompanied by the King of Saxony and other high
general officers) has just returned from a rapid ride round the circle
of the outer forts, within which the troops are all lying under canvas;
and from the top of the Garrison Church Steeple, the highest point in
this mighty fortressed town, nothing can be seen but endless vistas of
tented bivouacs. Never before has the German soldier been allowed any
other night covering in the field but the canopy of heaven, though,
indeed, in a country like France, which is, in truth, a land flowing
with milk, wine, and honey, and teeming with villages and other
opportunities of cantonment, he had comparatively little need of tents.
But it is quite a different thing in Russia, with its raw and rigid
climate, its vast, uncultivated, and uninhabited spaces; and it was in
view of the probable contingency of a campaign in such a foodless and
roofless wilderness that the General Staff, with that remarkable
foresight and wisdom which has always distinguished it, resolved to
equip all the Army Corps lying nearest the Eastern frontier with the
very best tents procurable—namely, such as were at once waterproof,
windproof, and even fireproof. For otherwise what ruin might not a spark
from a bivouac fire entail upon the tented fields which stretch away in
every direction towards the horizon, both here and at Posen, at Neisse,
and at Königsberg, reminding one of the hosts, countless as the sands on
the sea-shore, of the five kings who encamped over against Gibeon.

But I must not omit to record a curious incident which happened as the
Emperor was riding past the statue of Copernicus, whose birthplace was
Thorn. Just when abreast the monument of that immortal astronomer, His
Majesty remarked to his suite: ‘_Ja, meine Herren_, there you see the
man who first opened the eyes of the world to the true nature of the
solar system; and I think that with God’s help we shall equally be able
to assign Russia her proper place in the system of nations.’




                     THE AUSTRIAN PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.

                        DETAILS OF PREPARATION.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                      THORN, _April 29_.

To-night the Emperor (who continues to display wonderfully good spirits
and energy) gave a banquet in the hastily furbished-up rooms of the
gloomy old Schloss, in honour of Feldzeugmeister Baron Beck, the Chief
of the Austrian Staff, who, pending the progress of his well-thought-out
mobilisation and massing scheme, which he had set a-going by a simple
order from Vienna, had hastily run up here by rail to concert united
action with his German colleague, Count von Schlieffen, the present
occupier of Moltke’s high and responsible office. From a trustworthy
source I gather that this was the substance of Baron von Beck’s
communication:—

It had been discovered, beyond all doubt, that the main objective of the
Russian invasion was Lemberg, in the direction of which Dragomiroff was
concentrating immense masses of troops, drawn from the 4th, 8th, 9th,
10th, 11th, 12th Army Corps, in the rear of whom other forces, furnished
by the remoter 13th, 16th, 17th and other Corps, were pushing up as fast
as the defective railway system of the country would allow them.
Austria, on her part, had resolved to combine her defensive forces into
three armies—one of about 300,000 strong, in East Galicia, on the
Dniester; another, about as half as strong (150,000), on the San, with
its back on Przemysl, that tremendous bulwark of Middle Galicia; and a
third, of about 120,000, near Cracow, that almost equally formidable
_place d’armes_, and key of Western Galicia on the Upper Vistula.

But these numbers do not include a force of eight independent Cavalry
Divisions, each of four Brigades, or four regiments, which are to be
ranked along the Galician frontier at the likeliest points of danger
from the mass-raidings of Russian horsemen.

[Illustration:

  THE KNIGHTS OF MALTA AT AMBULANCE WORK.
]

Such were meanwhile the relative dispositions and prospects on either
side of the Austro-Russian border, while, on the other hand, General
Gourko, the hero of the Balkans, was concentrating at Warsaw an army
consisting of the 5th, 6th, 14th, 15th Corps, and other troops, for the
double purpose of holding the Germans in check, and of operating towards
Cracow, on the Austrian left flank. Moreover, the 2nd Russian Corps from
Wilna, and the 3rd from Riga, seemed to be marshalling on the lower
Niemen with the view of looking over into Königsberg; and of these
Muscovite troops in the Baltic Provinces, no less than in Western
Poland, Baron Beck trusted that the Germans would give a good and
satisfactory account.

As a token of his complete satisfaction with the Baron’s lucid and
hopeful exposition of the military situation, the Emperor, at parting,
which was very cordial on His Majesty’s part, conferred on the
distinguished Chief of the Austrian Staff the Red Eagle of the first
class (with swords), and, at the same time, intrusted him with an
autograph missive for his august master at Vienna.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                           THORN, LATER.

From my correspondent with the Army of the Baltic at Königsberg I learn
that its mobilisation is now complete, and that Count Waldersee (who has
had a bad fall from his horse, but is better again) is burning to make a
dash across the frontier and pluck a leaf from the laurel-wreath of
General Gourko.

The 2nd, or Pomeranian Corps, has meanwhile been appointed to cope with
any descent from the Russian Fleet on the Baltic shore; while the 9th
Corps has been similarly left in Schleswig-Holstein for the double
purpose of frustrating any attempted landing in that quarter, and also
of keeping an eye on Denmark, whose hearts are practically with the
Russians, and who have not yet forgotten the Redoubts of Düppel.

On the other hand, the fortification of Breslau is proceeding at a rapid
rate, Prince Pless and the Duke of Ratibor having lent a little army of
their miners to do the necessary pick and spade work; while the Army of
Silesia (under Prince George of Saxony) is now echeloned along the
railway line, parallel to the Russian border, between Kreuzburg and
Tarnowitz—_in utrumque paratus_—that is to say, ready either for a front
march across the frontier on Czenstochau, on the Warsaw railway, or for
a flanking movement of support in the direction of Cracow, as occasion
may demand.

The Austrians, we know, are well forward with their concentration; but
owing to the fact that the telegraph wires of the Russians have now
ceased to speak to the outer world, and that travellers are neither
allowed into nor out of Russia, we are still very much in the dark with
regard to their massings and their movements. To-morrow, however, we
mean, if possible, to try and penetrate a little the veil of this
mystery.




             FIRST COLLISION OF RUSSIAN AND GERMAN TROOPS.

                        SKIRMISH AT ALEXANDROVO.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                      THORN, _April 30_.

I have just returned from a reconnoitring ride with two squadrons of the
Zieten Hussars, who pushed across the Russian frontier to within sight
of Alexandrovo, the scene of the meeting (of which I had the good
fortune to be an eye-witness) between the old German Emperor and the
late Czar Alexander II., in September 1879, shortly before the signature
of the Austro-German Treaty of Alliance.

It is a curious coincidence that the first blood in the present campaign
should have been drawn within view of the spot to which the old
Emperor—greatly against the advice of his irate Chancellor,
Bismarck—then hastened to conjure the Czar to desist from his warlike
operations, and assure him, on the other hand, of his own unalterable
determination to keep the peace.

When we had advanced by the road skirting the railway to within about a
mile of Alexandrovo, a gun attached to a body of Cossacks (they were of
the Don, as I could make out through my glass, from their blue tunics
faced with red) opened fire on us; and the shell, bursting right in
front of our leading troop, killed two horses and seriously wounded one
man (a Wachtmeister). So having thus caused the enemy to give tongue, we
turned bridle and trotted back, carrying with us the intelligence—the
rich fruit of our reconnaissance—that Alexandrovo was strongly occupied
by troops of all arms. Four sotnias of Cossacks came pelting after us,
but we were quick to outrun these rampaging gentry, to whom a gun from
one of our horse-batteries sent hurtling over a few shells as a parting
souvenir of our hasty yet successful visit.




                      WARLIKE EXCITEMENT IN PARIS.


 (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. D. Christie Murray._)

                                                      PARIS, _April 30_.

Paris to-night is in a state of the maddest ferment. For some days past
the public have followed with breathless interest the rapid development
of events on the Russo-German frontier, and the news of the first
skirmish at Alexandrovo, which was printed in _Le Soir_ this evening,
has roused the wildest enthusiasm. Long and anxious consultations of
Ministers have been held daily, and the Press, with hardly an exception,
have been urging on the Government an immediate declaration of war. Many
of the better-class Germans have been hurrying from Paris—a precaution
which, in the issue, has been shown to be judicious. When to-day’s news
became known, every trade and artifice was instantly abandoned, and the
streets since three o’clock till now have been thronged by vast crowds,
pulsating to a more and more impassioned excitement. By four o’clock
there were literally fifty thousand people standing in the street with
newspapers in their hands, and every reader was the centre of an excited
throng. I was standing opposite the Vaudeville when a man, bearing a
prodigious bundle of newspapers wet from the press, came staggering
swiftly towards the kiosque. The mob fell upon him, despoiled him of his
burden, and tore open his parcel. There was such a wild hurry to learn
the news, and everybody was so eager to be first with it, that scores of
the journals were torn to ribbons, and hundreds more were trampled into
the mud of the pavement. The proprietress of the kiosque wrung her hands
and wept over the spectacle, and a gentleman who, by pressure of the
crowd, was forced half-way through one of the windows, vociferously
demanded to know the value of the lost journals. The woman instantly
became business-like, and appraised them roughly at a hundred francs.
The gentleman produced a pocket-book and paid her twice over, shouting
noisily, ‘I present this glorious news to Paris! _Vive la Russie! A bas
la Prusse!_’ That was the first signal I heard, and in one minute the
whole boulevard rang with frenzied roar on roar. Omnibuses, public
carriages, and vehicles of every description were wedged immovably in
the crowd which thronged the horse-road. The drivers rose from their
seats, the passengers and occupants of the carriages stood up in their
places and roared and gesticulated with the rest. Hundreds of people at
once strove to make speeches, and the combined result was such a
_charivari_ as can scarcely have been heard since the great day of the
Confusion of Tongues.

I, myself, had occasion to be thankful for that inconquerable English
accent which has always disfigured my French. A blond beard and
spectacles have always helped me to something of a German look, and
to-day has given the few Germans who happen to be left in Paris such a
scare as the bravest of them is not likely to forget. At one moment I
was surrounded by a wild section of the mob, whose yells of ‘Down with
Prussia!’ were far too obviously intended to be personal to me. There
was nothing for it but to join in the shouting, and I cried ‘_Vive la
France!_’ and ‘_A bas la Prusse!_’ as lustily as any of them. There was
an instantaneous laugh at the English accent, and I was left alone; but
I could not help thinking what would have happened had I chanced to
learn my French mainly in Berlin rather than in London. One unfortunate
German is reported fatally injured by the violence of a mob at the Gare
du Nord. He had booked for London, and is said to have carried with him
only a small handbag, and to have left all the rest of his belongings at
the hotel, in his hurry to catch the train for Calais. The director of
the Opera came near to paying with his life for his artistic allegiance
to Wagner. Happily for him he was able to take refuge in the house of a
friend, and the mob contented itself by keeping up a ceaseless
boo-hooing for an hour or more.


            EXTRAORDINARY SCENE IN THE PLACE DE LA CONCORDE.

The wildest manifestation of the afternoon was in the Place de la
Concorde, where an immense mob fell to dancing about the statue of
Strasburg. Everybody knows the sullen threat with which that statue has
been placarded for so many years. It runs ‘L. D. P. (the initials
standing for “Ligue de Patriotes”) Qui Vive? La France. 1870–18—.’ When
the prodigious noise created by the mob seemed at its highest, it was
cloven, as it were, by a din still greater, and a solid phalanx of men
forced a way into the already crowded square. In the centre of this
phalanx twenty or thirty men marched, bearing a long ladder, the heads
of many of them being thrust between the rungs. In the middle of the
ladder was seated a working painter in a blue blouse. The man was
literally wild with excitement, and was roaring ‘Quatre vingt douze’ to
a sort of mad, improvised tune, in which the packed marchers about him
joined with the fell stress of their lungs. In one hand the man
flourished aloft a pot of red paint, with the contents of which he
occasionally bedewed his unheeding companions, some of whom had
playfully bedaubed their own and others’ features, so that they looked
as if they had just come fresh from some scene of massacre. In the other
hand the man held aloft a sheaf of brushes, and in an instant the vast
crowd seized the motive of his presence there, and the meaning of the
rhythmic repetition of ‘Quatre vingt douze!’

[Illustration:

  EXTRAORDINARY SCENE IN THE PLACE DE LA CONCORDE:

  THE MOB TEARING THE MOURNING EMBLEMS FROM THE STATUE OF STRASBURG.
]

A way was cleared for the advancing cohort as if by magic. The ladder,
still supporting the painter, was drawn up lengthwise before the statue,
and the workman knelt to his task. At first it was impossible for him to
work, for the bearers of the ladder were jigging to the tune they sang;
but by and by they were persuaded to quiet, and a very striking and
impressive silence fell upon the crowd. The man, with great
deliberation, and with a much firmer hand than he might have been
supposed to own at a time of such excitement, drew the outline of the
figures 9 and 2 in white chalk, at as great a size as the space of the
placard admitted. His movements were watched with an actually breathless
interest, and when, after the completion of his drawing, he rose and
clasped the knees of the statue in his arms with a joyful and
affectionate cry, two or three people in my neighbourhood sobbed aloud.
The man knelt down again and filled in with red paint the outline he had
drawn. One grim personage, with a squint and a pock-marked face, who
held a short, well-blacked clay between his teeth, shouldered me at this
moment, and said, ‘_C’est le sang de la France, ça_.’ He thought so well
of this that he moved away among the crowd repeating it, nudging his
neighbours to call attention to the saying, and pointing a dirty
forefinger at the red paint of the figures to indicate its meaning. I
was waiting for an outburst of enthusiasm when the figures were
completed, but to my amazement the mob accepted the proclamation they
conveyed with a grave silence, as if it had been in some way authentic
and official, and as if for the first time they recognised the terrible
significance of the hour. Their quiet did not endure long, for one of
their number, having contrived to scramble on to the ladder, clambered
up the statue, and amid great cheers tore from it the ragged emblems of
mourning which have so long disfigured it.

Then came an episode, the like of which would be possible nowhere but in
Paris. The whole thing might have been arranged for scenic effect, and
the distinguished artist who made the _coup_ had never, brilliant as his
triumphs have been, arrived on the stage at so opportune a moment, or
encountered so overwhelming a reception. The new-comer was no other than
M. Jean de Reszke, who was on his way to dine with a friend before
appearing as Faust in Gounod’s masterpiece this evening. His coachman
was slowly making way along the crowded road when the great singer was
recognised. He was greeted with a roar of applause, and a dozen members
of the crowd threw open the closed landau he sat in, while a thousand
voices clamoured for the _Marseillaise_. The statue had, at that
instant, been denuded of its last rag of mourning, and M. de Reszke, who
had risen bareheaded in the carriage, was whipped out of it in a trice,
and borne, _nolens volens_, to the figure, and placed aloft on the
pedestal. His companion, a lady attired with much distinction, was at
first evidently alarmed, but soon gathered the peaceful intention of the
crowd, and seizing the meaning of the moment, she stripped from her own
shoulders a handsome scarlet cloak, and threw it towards M. de Reszke.
It was immediately passed on to him, and he, with considerable
difficulty, and at the risk of a tumble on the heads of the people below
him, succeeded in casting the cloak over the shoulders of the statue. At
this, all the previous noises which cleft the air of Paris this
afternoon seemed as nothing. The cheering was simply deafening and
maddening, and lasted for full three minutes. At length perfect silence
was restored, and M. de Reszke began to sing the _Marseillaise_. He was
pale at first, and obviously unstrung at the spectacle of this
prodigious audience, and for the first few notes his voice was broken
and ineffective. He gathered confidence, however, before he had
completed the singing of the first line, and gave the rest of the song
with an inspiring vigour and _élan_.

From the beginning of the whole extraordinary scene people had been
flocking in from every quarter, and I believe that I am well within
bounds when I say that the singer had an audience of a hundred and
twenty thousand. The chorus was one of the most stupendous and moving
things which can ever have been heard by human ears. It rose from the
densely-packed mass of humanity in one amazing roll and roar of sound,
and its echoes came straggling faintly from the Rue de Rivoli and the
Tuileries Gardens, from the Avénue des Champs Elysées, from the Rue
Royale, from the Pont de la Concorde, and the embankment on the further
side of the river. When the whole song was finished it was redemanded,
and was sung through again with undiminished relish both by the soloist
and the chorus. Finally, the singer was permitted to descend from the
pedestal, and was escorted to his carriage. The crowd had taken out the
horses, and M. de Reszke and his companion were drawn away by some
hundreds of volunteers. The great singer’s nationality has made him the
idol of Paris during all the late days of strained expectation. Every
night the Opera-house has been thronged, and every song from his lips
has been received with literal thunders of applause.


                    THE PRESIDENT SPEAKS—‘A BERLIN!’

                                                                  LATER.

The crowd had already begun to thin when the news passed round that the
Ministers were in conclave at the Elysée. I acted immediately on the
first hint I received, and with great difficulty made my way across the
Place. I found myself almost at once wedged in anew, this time in a
streaming current which set steadily towards the Elysée. The crowd grew
vaster every moment, for by this time all Paris seemed to have been
drawn to that quarter of the town. For a long time there was silence, or
what seemed like it after the torrent of noise which had roared so long
in all ears, but at last the babble of excited tongues began again, and
was intermixed with occasional cries of impatience. These grew in a
steady crescendo, until no single voice was audible. But before things
reached that point I had heard a hundred excited conjectures as to the
course which would be adopted by England at this crisis. By seven
o’clock the patience of the mob was quite outworn. The building, so far
as could be seen from the outside, was in complete darkness, and the
rumour of the meeting of the Ministers seemed likely to be practically
denied. At length, however, a sudden swell in the storm of sound greeted
the appearance of light at three windows, and certain ill-defined
shadows were seen moving on the blinds. One profile was distinct and
stationary for a moment, and there was a roar of ‘Ribot!’ A minute later
the blind of the centre window was drawn up, the window itself was
thrown open, and the figure of M. Ribot, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
was seen. This apparition was the signal for a new outburst in which
only the name of the President of the Republic could be distinguished.
The air rang with shouts of ‘Carnot! Carnot!’ and M. Ribot having braved
this incredible tempest for a few seconds only, bowed and retired. A
minute later the President himself appeared. From where I stood his
features were invisible, but his attitude was erect, and he stretched
out his right hand with an impressive gesture to command silence. It was
some time before this injunction was obeyed, but when he was allowed to
speak his voice was firm and unusually clear. His words were few and to
the point. ‘Citizens! Germany has declared war upon the ally of France.
Those gentlemen whom you have appointed as the guardians of the national
honour have debated the serious intelligence which has to-day awakened
the heart of Paris. It is my duty to tell you that there is no
dissentient voice amongst them. France will fulfil her pledges!’ At this
point M. Carnot was interrupted by a unanimous outburst of applause,
which made speech impossible for a space of at least five minutes. Again
and again, when it seemed about to quiet down, it was taken up from
distant quarters, and came rolling along like a wave, again to subside
and again to be renewed. When order was once more restored the President
continued: ‘France speaks to-night, and demands of her neighbour that
the menace against her ally shall be withdrawn. She couples with that a
demand for the surrender of those provinces which were torn from her
twenty years ago!’

There was at this more cheering, and yet more. The President retired,
and a great deluge of rain which had been threatening to fall all day
speedily cleared the streets. The latest and most important of the day’s
events is yet hardly an hour old, but we seem now to be living in a city
of the dumb. Everybody is hoarse with four hours’ almost continuous
shouting, but the popular excitement is as great as ever.

The house of M. Ferry has been guarded by the military, and only the
_entente cordiale_ existing between the troops and the populace has
saved it from attack. At the moment of writing the Boulevards are again
crowded. The reply of Germany is, of course, a foregone conclusion, but
it is awaited with intense eagerness.




                     DECLARATION OF WAR BY FRANCE.

         DRAMATIC RECEPTION OF THE NEWS BY THE GERMAN EMPEROR.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                         THORN, _May 1_.

For this morning the Emperor had ordered a review of all the troops,
amounting to about 60,000 men concentrated hereabouts—the scene of the
parade being a long sweep of meadow-land, not unlike the Champ de Mars
at Paris, on the right bank of the Vistula. His Majesty and his Staff
took their stand on a convenient knoll commanding all the ground, and
scarcely had the serried battalions of the 3d Corps, with their
bristling bayonets glittering in the bright sun, begun to stride along
in all their martial and magnificent array, when the march past was
interrupted by a most dramatic and thrilling incident.

I was standing on the outside fringe of the brilliant circle of His
Majesty’s suite, quietly chatting to Dr. von Leuthold, the Emperor’s
body physician, when suddenly we saw an orderly officer dash up to his
Majesty and deliver a message, which we could discern from the colour of
the envelope to be a telegram. The Emperor tore it open, glanced through
the contents, then looked up, and let his eye wander all round the
circle of his suite, as if to note the impression produced upon their
minds by the news which His Majesty felt had already been intuitively
divined by those about him. ‘_Ja, meine Herren_,’ he at last said; ‘it
is just as we all expected. This is a telegram from General von Caprivi;
France has declared war against us’ (_Frankreich hat Uns den Krieg
erklärt_.) There was a moment’s pause, each man looking at his neighbour
to study the effect of this terrible announcement, and then all eyes
were again turned on the Emperor, who looked a shade paler than before,
but not a whit less calm and resolute.

‘Gentlemen,’ he said at last, ‘this is a serious moment for us all, but
the news dismays just as little as it surprises us. Yet I must now leave
you, for the danger to the Fatherland is much greater on its western
than on its eastern frontier; and where the danger to the Fatherland is
greatest, there also must Germany’s Kaiser be.

‘_Meine Herren_, my place as Commander-in-Chief of our armies here will
now be taken by that tried and gallant soldier, my dear friend and
brother, the King of Saxony, who will, I am sure, bring honour and
victory to our arms. One foe at a time is quite enough, and the sooner
we can help our allies to dispose of their invader, the sooner shall we
be able to concentrate all our forces and inflict a crushing blow on our
hereditary enemy (_Erbfeind_), who has again, in the most wanton manner,
broken loose against us.

‘Gentlemen, this is no time for words, when the call to action is
tingling through all our veins, so I will only invoke the blessing of
God upon the course of our arms in this quarter, and hasten myself to
where the peril of our Fatherland is sorest. Adieu, and may each and all
of us do his duty throughout the coming period of grievous trial and
tribulation!’

So saying, the Emperor put spurs to his steed and, accompanied only by
his immediate suite, galloped off back to Thorn, receiving as he went
three enthusiastic ‘hochs.’

Just as I am closing this despatch information reaches us from Berlin of
a naval engagement in the Baltic between our fleet and some Russian
ships; but you, in London, will probably hear all the details before
they reach us here.


                  WITH THE GERMAN FLEET IN THE BALTIC.

We have been favoured with the following letter, under date April 30,
from Rear-Admiral Philip Colomb, who has been an eye-witness of the
naval operations in the Baltic:—

I was at Kiel with my yacht when the news of the attempt on Prince
Ferdinand’s life reached us. The successive telegrams and published news
created the greatest excitement among all classes, but especially
amongst those connected with the navy. Simultaneously with the news that
Russia had crossed the Austrian frontier, several German cruisers went
to sea, and in a day or two a regular fleet began to assemble in the
port. I don’t understand German, but my wife does, and she told me
whenever we met an eager crowd discussing, that it was all about whether
the fleet would not be kept to defend the place, and the danger of an
attack by the Russian Fleet if the German Fleet did not remain.

I thought I had better get out of it, as if such an attack were made it
might be awkward for me. I think my wife was so excited about it that
she wanted to stay where we were and see it all; but I thought we might
see all there was to be seen in greater safety from the seaside. And
then from the conversation of some German naval officers which my wife
overheard, I gathered that the navy, at least, believe that it would try
to carry war into the enemy’s country. There were, however, great
discussions about some German coast defence vessels that had not coal
supply enough to go up the Baltic, and great arguments as to what ships
would go and what would stay. As every day more heavy ships arrived and
stayed, while only small ones came and went, I began to think that after
all it was most likely that the Germans would not stay quiet to let the
Russians ravage their coasts. Then, by the time that nine or ten large
turret-ships and others, besides several smaller ones, had assembled, I
understood that the German armies were about attacking Russia by way of
Königsberg, as well as to the south. I thereupon made sure that the
German fleet would go up in support, even if they were not ready to do
more.

So the end of it was that I waited till ten big ships and five or six
smaller ones got under way, and then I did ditto, and steamed out with
them. I was afraid I might be left behind, as my coal supply did not
allow me to go at any speed; but I found the Germans, after putting
their big ships into two lines a good distance apart, with some of the
smaller ones close at hand on each side, and two or three others a long
way in front, steamed quite slowly along, not more than five or six
knots. I went inshore of them, and kept them in sight a couple of miles
off.

We passed close to Rügen Island the afternoon succeeding our departure,
and the south end of Bornholm in the night. I made out that we were
steering straight, for Libau, which is about 450 miles from Kiel. We
scarcely had seen anything in the shape of a ship except a couple of
homeward-bound English trading steamers; but on the second morning at
daybreak I noticed all the German ships had been stoking up, and were
making an immense amount of smoke. There was a good deal of signalling
going on between the German flagships—there were two of these yesterday,
one at the head of each line—and one or two of the cruisers, which sped
away nearly out of sight, and then came slowly back, signalling as they
came. The same sort of thing went on on the third morning, when we had
got beyond Dantzig, with the difference that two German cruisers were
seen steaming up, one from the southward, and one from the
south-westward. The fleet stopped, and a boat from each of these went to
the flagship and returned, after which there was more signalling, and a
boat from every ship went on board the flagship. I suppose the other
Admiral and the captains were in them, but I was too far off to make
certain.

After a couple of hours we all went on again slowly as before, but
electric and other lights were flashing about all night, so that we were
very excited, and made sure that something was in the wind. As a
consequence, long before daylight on the fourth morning we were on deck
looking out in all directions, and with a good head of steam so as to
get out of the way in case of accidents. Sure enough at daybreak there
was a great bank of smoke to the northward, and presently I could make
out a mast or two sticking up. The two German cruisers, which were five
or six miles in front, at once became very busy with their signals, and
soon afterwards the whole fleet formed into a single line and turned to
the westward, not steaming any faster, but making such clouds of black
smoke that they almost hid themselves from me. It did not seem that the
Russian Fleet—I was not sure whether it was or not—was closing much, but
one or two ships appeared to draw more in front as if to close the two
German cruisers. Presently the other cruisers that had kept closer to
the fleet also drew out in front, but none of them seemed more inclined
to close the strangers than the strangers were to close them.

I could not make it out at all. I had always understood that in a modern
naval battle, everybody would immediately run at everybody else, and
this looked so little like the sort of thing that I was inclined to
think that what I saw was only an advance guard of the Russian Fleet.
Yet it looked too large a mass for that, and my doubts were presently
set at rest.

Signals were made to one of the German cruisers that had come to us the
day before, and she presently turned and slowly steamed to the
southward. She passed us so very close that I took heart of grace to
call out—

‘Is that the Russian Fleet?’

And the answer came back—

‘Oh! ye-es, zat is ze Russians—ve sall fight zem! So!’ and the steamer
went on her way.

I began to have some sort of an idea that, perhaps, neither fleet was
able to make out the force of the other, and was, therefore, not in a
hurry to bring it to action. And this might easily be so. Though the sky
was clear overhead and the water quite smooth, it was misty round the
horizon, and so far as the Russian Fleet was concerned, it seemed to me
very likely that even the advanced German cruisers were not able to
discover more than I could, between the mist and the smoke.

But as I puzzled myself over this, I also thought that, perhaps, as the
main attack of Germany was going on by land, it might be her game merely
to watch the Russian Fleet. For if the Germans were badly beaten at sea,
Russia might be left free to land and cut their communications. I had
never thought of this kind of thing before, and I quite woke up with a
new sort of idea, for I saw quite well that the Russian Fleet could not
do anything unless they first thoroughly beat the Germans.


       ENGAGEMENT OFF DANTZIG—SINKING OF A RUSSIAN TORPEDO-BOAT.

I was so keen on my new ideas that I wanted to know more about it, and
so steamed well to the N.E. to see what the Russian Fleet was like. Just
as I did so, I saw a very small Russian steaming away to the
south-eastward as if to get the look at the German Fleet which I was
going to get at the Russian. She was stoking up tremendously, and
evidently going at great speed. Two of the German cruisers in front
immediately turned to the eastward to cut her off, but the plucky little
Russian did not seem to mind; they closed one another very rapidly, and
some puffs of smoke, followed by distant bangs, showed a little game of
long balls. The Russian had evidently much greater speed than the
others, and was drawing them astern, but quite away from her own fleet
or supports of any kind. All of a sudden I saw she was blowing off steam
furiously, and that her speed had slackened, if not dropped altogether.
She began to fire more rapidly, and so did the Germans. All three were
hidden by the cloud of smoke they raised. My engineer was frightfully
excited; he said, ‘It was one of them new boilers a-priming,’ and that
it was all up with the Russian. Sure enough it was, for all three ships
presently came out of the smoke, the little Russian with the German flag
flying over her own.

[Illustration:

  THE NAVAL BATTLE OFF DANTZIG—THE SINKING OF A RUSSIAN TORPEDO BOAT AND
    RESCUE OF THE CREW BY AN ENGLISH YACHT.
]

I had got far enough now to see that the Russian Fleet was much more
numerous than the German, but I could only make out six or seven really
big ships. But there were a crowd of small ones, and behind, eight or
nine little things like those we had seen taking the _Excellent’s_ men
for training. I thought it might be dangerous to get mixed up with such
a crowd, so I returned to the southward and eastward of the German
Fleet. I had noticed that the Russians were steering slowly parallel to
the position of the Germans, and night closed, leaving all things in
this position. Both sides never left off flashing their electric lights
up into the sky and all over the sea, and it really seemed to me as if
they must all be a good deal confused by such things.

So matters went on till eleven o’clock, when I made my wife go below,
while I lay down for a sleep on deck. I was awoke at one o’clock by such
a row as never was, the whole German Fleet was a blaze and a roar of
artillery. I supposed, of course, a Russian torpedo-boat attack, but it
was impossible to tell what had happened,—all one knew was that an
attack of some kind had been made. After a very few minutes the fire
began to slacken, and some of it I noticed, with an unpleasant
sensation, was coming my way. But that, too, soon came to an end. My
wife was at that moment beside me again, and she suddenly cried out,
‘Hark! what’s that?’ I could hear a rushing and a panting sound drawing
close to us, and then the ball of white foam that I had seen one night
from a torpedo boat. The panting suddenly stopped, and the rushing
became fainter and fainter until out of the dark came a torpedo-boat
evidently making for the yacht, but very slowly. Just as she was coming
alongside there was a sort of wild cry, and I saw she had suddenly gone
to the bottom. Our little boat was down in an instant, and I got hold of
somebody floating at once, while the men helped in two Russian sailors.
I found I had hold of a Russian officer, but he was evidently unable to
help himself. I could not get him in but we drew him alongside and the
men carried him up. I then saw that the poor chap was badly wounded in
the shoulder. No one on board could speak Russian, but we laid him down
on the deck, and my wife threw herself down beside him with her scissors
and began to cut away his dress, while she cried to her maid to bring
her water and linen. It was of no use, however. The poor fellow was
quite unconscious and bleeding to death. It was all over in ten minutes,
and we could do nothing but reverently commit the body to the deep. Our
other two Russians were unwounded, but could not make us understand
anything. We put them next day into an English vessel bound to Revel.

[Illustration:

  THE NAVAL BATTLE OFF DANTZIG—WOUNDED RUSSIANS ON BOARD THE ENGLISH
    YACHT.
]

We were eager enough in the morning to see what had happened, but there
seemed to be no ships absent. One of the battleships was, however,
evidently very much down by the head, and in the course of the morning
we saw her quit the fleet for the southward. Everything else was, in
fact, in the same position on both sides, and it was evident that a
regular battle was no nearer.

I presently saw a vessel—I think it must have been one of the German
Emperor’s yachts, from the look of her—coming up fast from the
southward, and as soon as she got near enough, she began making a long
signal. Almost directly, the German ships all turned towards her. They
stopped when she reached them, and after she had sent a boat to the
flagship, the whole fleet put on good speed, and stood nearly due west,
as if for Kiel again. I could not keep up with them, so I am going to
Colberg to post this and hear the news.

_P.S._—I have learnt at Colberg that the Emperor’s yacht brought news of
the declaration of war by France, and orders for the whole German fleet
to return to the Jahde at full speed, to avoid being caught between the
Russian and French fleets. The Germans say they sank several of the
Russian torpedo-boats, and that they had their broadside nets out. Only
the _Oldenburg_ was struck by a torpedo, the one I saw. She got into
Kiel all right, but was badly damaged. It is said that the Russians are
spread along the whole German Baltic coast, and descents are expected.




                      THE GERMAN PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.

               PROPOSED LINE OF INVASION THROUGH BELGIUM.


                                                        LONDON, _May 3_.

The declaration of war by France was the inevitable result of the action
of Germany in regard to Russia. Events, indeed, have marched with a
ruthless and tragical directness ever since the day, barely four weeks
since, when Prince Ferdinand narrowly escaped death from Russian
intrigue. In Germany, least of all, can there have been any doubt as to
the course France would take. The experience of 1870 must have made
abundantly clear to her what would be the outcome of the scenes on the
Paris boulevards which our Correspondent has so graphically described.
With powerful enemies on either flank, Germany cannot afford to adhere
to punctilio. With the double contest on her hands she cannot now hope
to bring into the battle-fields superior numbers, as in the wars of 1866
and 1870–71; prospects of success, as her chiefs well know, lie for her
in promptitude of action, in blows struck in unexpected places, in
carefully planned efforts to bewilder and divide the forces opposed to
her.

To strike anywhere at the eastern frontier of the French adversary,
barred as it is with almost continuous fortresses from Verdun to
Belfort, must necessarily involve prolonged delay, even if the heavy
siege-work which is inevitable should be ultimately successful. True,
Germany will no doubt be able to foil any offensive on the part of
France from the base of the fortified eastern frontier, but merely to do
this would be to confine herself to that defensive which is intensely
repugnant to her military character. Yet her only opening for the
offensive, unless she were to force or obtain by diplomacy a right of
way for her armies through neutral territory, of necessity must be by
that eastern frontier of France which is coterminous with her own
territory, and through or over the chain of fortresses which loom out
sullenly from behind that frontier line.

The ideal line of invasion of France by Germany obviously lies through
Belgium. It would turn and negative the chain of French fortresses on
the eastern frontier, and give the shortest route through hostile
territory to the French capital. Belgium is neutral ground; her
neutrality guaranteed by the Great Powers; but how vain a pretence is
this guarantee is already proved by the latest news from our Berlin
Correspondent. It is believed (he states on credible authority), that
Germany has been successful in exacting or obtaining from Belgium a
secret Convention, whereby the armies of the Empire shall be free to
traverse the former State, and to utilise for their purposes the Belgian
railway system. The advantages of this arrangement may be said to fairly
compensate Germany for the numerical superiority of the French forces
over those which she herself is able to bring into the field.

The German plan of campaign, as explained by our Berlin Correspondent,
is as follows:—Seven of the twenty Army Corps are engaged on the Russian
frontier under the King of Saxony. To cope with France there remain
thirteen corps, with a proportionate number of independent cavalry
brigades. The First Army, under the command of Prince Albrecht of
Prussia, is to advance through Belgium by Verviers, Liége, Namur, and
Charleroi, and cross the northern frontier of France between Maubeuge
and Rocroy, at and about Hirson. The fortresses on the French northern
frontier east of Maubeuge are of little account, and there are none on
the section specified. The Ardennes and Eifel districts are regarded as
affording considerable protection to the line of communication as far as
the frontier, and a further protection will presently be mentioned. It
is unfortunate that between Aix and Liége there is available but one
line of railway, but the accommodation is copious on either side of this
section, several lines being serviceable right to the frontier.

This First Army is to consist of six Army Corps, the Guards, 7th, 8th,
10th, 11th, and 16th being those whose respective provinces are nearest
to the region of concentration west of Cologne. Among its
Corps-commanders are such men as Generals Meerscheidt-Hullessem, Von der
Burg, Von Versen, Albedyll, Von Loë, all distinguished names in the war
of 1870–71. The Emperor himself, who of course is Commander-in-Chief of
all the German forces in both fields of operations, accompanies this
army, after leaving the eastern frontier with General von Schlieffen,
the Chief of the great General Staff, and a number of the German
princes. The cavalry commander is General the Grand Duke Frederick of
Baden.

The Second Army is to consist of the 9th, 14th, and 15th Army Corps. The
course of action prescribed for this is to advance from Trèves through
Luxembourg, with the consent of the Grand Duke, following the
Trèves-Brussels railway as far as Arlon, whence it is to approach the
French frontier between the fortress of Montmedy and Sedan, and in this
vicinity, while covering the communications of the main army, draw on
itself the attention of the French field army presumably lying behind
the northern section of the French frontier fortresses from about Verdun
southward, so hindering it from marching westward to swell the forces
opposing themselves to the main German army moving by Namur and
Charleroi. Having accomplished this ‘holding’ operation, whether with or
without a battle, it is to disengage, move westward below Mezieres, and
approach that army after it has crossed the frontier. In performing this
arduous task the Second Army will have to encounter the physical
difficulties of the Eastern Ardennes, and protect its line of
communication running perilously near the frontier. To aid in this work,
severe at once, and delicate, it is to be furnished with a strong
cavalry force, under the command of Lieutenant-General von Kleist.

If from behind the curtain of their eastern frontier fortresses the
French are bent on taking the offensive, German strategists, says our
Correspondent, freely recognise the impossibility, owing to the
diversion through Belgium of the bulk of the German force, of hindering
them from over-running Alsace and Lorraine up toward the left bank of
the Upper Rhine, where the German fortresses would give them halt. Yet
such an advance, if attempted, they will not find quite an unchequered
promenade. In Lorraine, Metz, for instance, will somewhat interfere with
free transport by rail. In the chain of frontier forts the French
engineers have designedly left between Toul and Epinal an undefended gap
or _trouée_ of considerable breadth. Because of the fortifications of
the second line of defence this specious interval is greatly in the
nature of a trap, but its debouche toward France nevertheless needs to
be watched by a strong field force on either flank.

Confronting this gap, on the plateau behind the Meurthe, between
Luneville and St. Die, with advanced posts about Ramberville, and a
strong wide-stretching cordon of cavalry still further forward, the
Third German Army, consisting of the 13th Würtemberg, and 1st and 2d
Bavarian Army Corps, under the command of Leopold, Prince Regent of
Bavaria, is to take up its position. The Prince is to make
demonstrations from time to time to hold in position the French
field-forces on its flanks and rear. If threatened in palpably
overwhelming strength, the army has a line of retreat across the Middle
Vosges open, striking back in the passes as it retires. Should the gap
be judged practical by-and-by because of the withdrawal of the French
field-forces to participate in the _mêlée_ in the interior of France,
instructions how to act will, of course, be sent from the Imperial
Headquarters. As soon as the mobilisation of the active army is
complete, the Landwehr is to be mobilised with all speed to the last
man, and got into readiness to reinforce the armies already in the
field, for the Fatherland will be contending against heavy odds, and
will need the devotion of all its sons. It should be said that the 2d
(Pomeranian) Army Corps is retained in Germany for the protection of the
northern coast.




                      THE FRENCH PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.


While these preparations have been made by Germany, France has not been
idle. According to the latest telegrams from Paris, the original plan of
campaign devised by the French Etat-major has undergone modification,
now that it has become virtually certain that the main German advance is
to be made through Belgium. The contingency that a contributory stroke
may be made in that direction had, indeed, been in a measure provided
for originally. To meet it four Army Corps were to take up an initial
position in the fortress-bound triangle, La Fere-Soissons-Laon. Two were
to be on the Meuse between Mouzon and Dun to confront a possible German
entrance between Montmedy and Longwy. Three were allotted to the
frontier on the extreme south-east, since Italy is a member of the
Triple Alliance. The garrison of the Government of Paris was not to
move. The remaining ten corps were destined for the eastern frontier
from Verdun to Belfort.

But these arrangements have been dislocated now that it has become
apparent that a great German army is gathering on the eastern frontier
of Belgium, with plain intent to strike for Northern France through that
State. General Saussier, who holds the high position of
Commander-in-Chief of all the French armies, and the chief of staff,
General Miribel, have had the sudden task of planning other
dispositions. No fewer than seven Army Corps, the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 9th,
10th, and 11th, all furnished by the most adjacent territorial military
‘regions,’ are now to constitute the army to be massed in and beyond the
La Fere-Soissons-Laon triangle, and beyond toward the northern frontier
west of the Givet salient, and this army Saussier himself is to command.
An army of two corps, the 5th and 6th, commanded by General Carre de
Bellemar, is to line the Meuse on the northeast, as in the original
disposition. Seven corps, the 7th, 8th, 12th, 13th, 17th, and 18th, are
to constitute the field forces and garrisons of the eastern frontier,
divided into two armies, the northern army of three corps commanded by
General de Galliffet, the southern of four by the Duc de Auerstädt
(Davoust). Three corps, the 14th, 15th, and 16th, all of south-eastern
domicile, are to watch the Italian frontier from Albertville to Mentone,
under the chief command of General Thomassin. The French mobilisation
was set about appreciably later than the German; but once begun, no time
has been lost, and the rapidity with which it has progressed and is
being completed has surprised even those who were most strongly
convinced of the regeneration of military France.




                       PUBLIC FEELING IN ENGLAND.

                          DEBATE IN THE HOUSE.


                                                        LONDON, _May 3_.

While, thus armed and fortified, France and Germany stand watching each
other across the Rhine, we in England remain in a suspense profounder
than we have experienced any time this side of the Napoleonic wars. The
political excitement during the last few days has been intense, and at
the prospect now imminent of the violation of the neutrality of Belgium
has set the country by the ears. The people, the Press, and the
politicians of England are deeply stirred, and the crowded public
meeting, called at a few hours’ notice, which was held yesterday in
London is a proof, if proof were needed, that the Government will be
compelled by popular feeling to strain every nerve to avert from
‘gallant little Belgium’ the violation of that neutrality, to the
maintenance of which Britain stands pledged. The opposition press,
ablaze with zeal for the honour of England now that there seems an
opening for the charge of supineness against the Government, shrieks in
scathing leaders that the voice of the nation should enforce on the
_fainéant_ Ministry its imperative duty of addressing vehement
remonstrances to the Great Teuton power. The journals favourable to the
Government cannot refrain from addressing strong representations to the
Cabinet regarding the uncertain future of Antwerp if Belgium is again to
become the cockpit of Europe, and the standing menace to Britain which
that great fortress will become if it pass into other hands than those
of the Belgians. The House, too, appears equally moved, and not a day
has passed but at the question hour a rattle of shrewish interpellations
has been shot across the House at the target of the Treasury Bench. The
inexplicable composure of Her Majesty’s Ministers has, however, at
length, broken down before the insistence of the Opposition.

On Tuesday, when the German mobilisation over against the eastern
frontier of Belgium was well forward, and when there remained no longer
any doubt that the army gathering there would traverse that State, Sir
William Harcourt rose in his place, every eye in the House centred on
him, and with portentous earnestness of aspect and manner, demanded that
the Leader of the House should name an early day for a debate on ‘the
grave international questions and eventualities connected with the
imminent violation of the neutrality of Belgium, and the attitude of the
ministry in relation to those questions and eventualities.’ Sir William
reseated himself with, indeed, a brow of care and gravity, as beseemed a
statesman dealing with a momentous crisis; but the lower section of his
expressive visage mantled with a conscious complacency which seemed to
indicate a conviction that he had propounded something in the nature of
a ‘settler’ for this apparently inertest of Governments. ‘Take
to-morrow, if you like,’ drawled the Leader of the House without rising,
and then he actually and visibly yawned. The smirk faded out of Sir
William’s face at the roar of laughter, irrepressible on the part of the
Liberals and Conservatives alike, which followed Mr. Balfour’s drawl and
yawn.

[Illustration:

  A SCENE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS—SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT QUESTIONS THE
    GOVERNMENT.
]

The Opposition papers have vied in vituperation of Mr. Balfour’s
_insouciance_, which they described as ‘insolence,’ ‘impertinence,’ and
‘insult.’ One provincial journal congratulates Sir William Harcourt on
his self-restraint in having refrained from pulling Mr. Balfour’s nose,
and another, with startling novelty, compares the latter to Nero
fiddling while Rome was burning. But yesterday’s scene in the House has
shown, at least, that the Government, though composed, has not been
indifferent. It must have been galling to many of the hot-brained to
have observed that when in the afternoon Mr. Balfour lounged into the
crowded House, he showed no symptoms of being crushed, or even
perturbed, by this avalanche of invective. In opening the debate, the
ordinarily bland and gentle Sir William Harcourt displayed a truculent
aggressiveness which startled all listeners, so foreign was it to his
previously disclosed nature. When he had finished, and the dust had
settled a little, Mr. Balfour slowly rose. He spoke as follows:

‘Her Majesty’s Government were confidentially informed a year ago, both
by Germany and Belgium, that those two States had concluded a secret
convention, in terms of which, in case of war between Germany and
France, Belgium was to permit German troops to pass through her
territory and to utilise her railways. It no doubt is a question whether
Belgium has any right thus to permit the violation of her neutrality
guaranteed by the Great Powers, but the question in the circumstances is
an abstract one. Who is to intervene to hinder her? Not Germany, who has
made a bargain with her for the right of violation. Not France, who
violated Belgian neutrality with impunity in 1870, and who, if she now
is ready in time, will, in her anxiety to fight the Germans outside the
French frontier, assuredly violate it again—if, indeed, the act can be
termed violation when the neutrality is virtually dead already by
Belgium’s own act. In eastern Europe there is other business on hand
just now, than solicitude for the protection of Belgian neutrality. Does
the right hon. baronet propose that England should undertake this task
single-handed, and, _inter alia_, force Belgium against her will to
co-operate with us in retrieving the neutrality she has already
surrendered? We should, and in hostility to Belgium, stand alone, in an
attempt to make good the guarantee we entered into conjointly with other
Powers; and I say frankly that this is not a Quixotic Government. But
when we were informed, in strict confidence, of this convention, we took
measures for the interest and protection of Great Britain. Those
measures may give umbrage in certain quarters; that we cannot help. We
claimed and obtained from Belgium the right to occupy and garrison the
great fortress of Antwerp if the convention alluded to should become
operative, and to hold that fortress pending the solution of the
momentous events now clearly impending on the Continent of Europe. We
recognised the impossibility of enduring in Antwerp a possibly hostile
neighbour so close to our own street-door, and we resolved and have
secured the right to be our own neighbour over the way in the troublous
times approaching. During the past week we have been quietly and
unostentatiously making some needful preparations. These are now so
forward that I may inform the House that a complete division of British
infantry and artillerymen 15,000 strong will be embarked at sundry of
our ports on the day after to-morrow, and will land at Antwerp on the
following morning, being conveyed swiftly in steam transports under the
convoy of the Channel Squadron. The division will sail fully equipped
with an adequate supply of stores. Its commander will be a soldier whose
name and fame are familiar to us all; I refer to that distinguished
officer, Sir Evelyn Wood. The Belgians hand us over Antwerp as it
stands, with fortress, artillery, ammunition, and all appliances for
defensive operations which we fervently pray and trust that there shall
be no occasion to engage in.’

The cheering throughout Mr. Balfour’s short but pregnant speech had been
frequent and hearty; when he sat down it swelled in volume and force
that seemed to shake the roof. Sir William Harcourt, with the best grace
he could assume, professed himself satisfied, and the debate collapsed.

Late last night it was reported that the Government asked and received
powers to enlist 20,000 men, and to call out for duty a large number of
militia battalions.




                         BATTLE AT ALEXANDROVO.

                        DEFEAT OF THE RUSSIANS.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                               ALEXANDROVO (IN RUSSIAN POLAND), _May 2_.

As a result of the scouting ride undertaken by a squadron of Zieten
Hussars from this place, as mentioned in a late telegram of mine, it was
resolved at Headquarters here (and the decision was sanctioned by the
Emperor before his return to Berlin _en route_ for the Rhine) to make
another reconnaissance, this time in force with the view, if possible,
of ousting the Russians from Alexandrovo and possessing ourselves of
that important frontier position; for that the best defensive is an
energetic offensive is a maxim which still forms the chief guiding
principle of German warfare.

To-day, accordingly, a force consisting of the 6th Infantry Division,
under Lieutenant-General Von Schnabeltitz, a combined Cavalry Brigade
(Zieten Hussars and 3d, or Kaiser Alexander II. von Russland, Uhlans),
under Major-General von Säbelschlucker; and two sections (comprising six
batteries each, of six guns) under Major Count von Donnerkeil; to-day, I
say, this force, starting at dawn, made a rapid march eastward, and was
soon across the little stream forming the frontier, where the Russian
outposts—who seemed to be singularly supine—were quickly driven in by a
few shots from our advance guard. From a wounded Muscovite, who was shot
in the thigh and had to be left behind by his comrades, we learned that
Alexandrovo was, after all, not quite so strongly held as our late
reconnaissance had led us to suppose, its entire defending force
consisting of only one Infantry Brigade, under Major-General
Grodnovodsky, with several guns, a few sotnias of Cossacks, and two
squadrons of Dragoons. Perceiving, therefore, that we were considerably
stronger in all our arms—especially our infantry and artillery—we made
haste to push on towards our objective, and managed, by advancing at the
double, to gain the rising ground on our side of Alexandrovo before the
enemy could anticipate our design. But it was a close race; nor was it
won by us without a sharp brush, involving several casualties on either
side, between one of our Hussar squadrons, under Rittmeister Von
Rummelsburg, and a sotnia of Don Cossacks, who were very bravely led,
whoever was their commander.

Von Rummelsburg, who was sent forward with his Hussars to feel the
ground in front of our infantry, had just gained the brow of the
acclivity in question when he perceived the Cossacks making for the same
vantage-ground from the opposite side, and at once charged down upon
them in the gallantest style, emptying a few Russian saddles even before
the shock, for his regiment was one of those that had been
experimentally armed with the new combination lance-rifle—the invention
of an ingenious locksmith at Potsdam—of which the Emperor became
enamoured last year, and several of the brave Cossacks had thus
succumbed to the impact of lead before they could come within stabbing
distance of the equally fatal German spear—a notable feature this in
_fin de siècle_ warfare, and one that is likely to impress itself still
more vividly in the course of the present campaign.

The Cossacks being thus flung back on their infantry, whose movements
were of an unaccountably slow and confused kind, our guns dashed up to
the top of the bluff, which had formed the bone of contention between us
and the Muscovites, and, unlimbering like lightning, began to blaze away
at the retreating horsemen with shrapnel which seemed to do further
execution amongst them. Then, laying their pieces at long range and
loading with percussion-fuse shells, Donnerkeil’s gunners hastened to
rain a terrific torrent of destructive projectiles on the railway
station of Alexandrovo, behind which Grodnovodsky’s infantry had retired
for temporary shelter. His guns planted on a rising bit of orchard
ground on his left, were energetically enough worked against our
batteries, but did us little or no harm, as the Prussian artillerists,
always very careful in their selection of a firing position even in the
tumult of action, showed little more than the mere muzzles of their guns
over the crest of the land-wave, in the rear dip of which the infantry
of the 6th Division were lying prone and scatheless in eager readiness
to rush on as soon as the cannon of the Russians should be reduced to
silence.

Nor had they long to wait for this result, for the furious artillery
duel had barely lasted an hour when Grodnovodsky’s guns were seen to
limber up—such of them as had escaped dismounting—and lumber off; and
then our impatient battalions, throwing out their first fighting line,
fanlike, in skirmishing order, with supports behind and reserves
following, all in as machine-like and magnificent order as at a
field-day on the Tempelhof Common, began to push forward, the guns
firing over their heads all the while as they swarmed down the
Russian-ward slope of our eminence and across the rye and potato fields,
still rather wet and cloggy from last night’s rain, in front of
Alexandrovo. The Russian infantry attempted to debouch from their
shell-shattered position behind the railway station and other adjacent
buildings, and deploy in line of purpose to stem our steadily advancing
tide; but our guns, which were still able to pound away over the heads
of our own battalions, played dreadful havoc with their shrapnel charges
among Grodnovodsky’s out-manœuvred troops, who were also mown down in
great numbers by the fearful fire of our magazine-rifles, of which the
murderous volleys appeared to inspire our opponents with a feeling of
panic as unfamiliar to them as the effects of smokeless powder; and, for
the first time probably in all the military history of Russia, the
soldiers of the Czar positively turned tail and fled before superior
numbers and unaccustomed terrors.

Yet the dead and wounded whom they left behind amply attested the
tenacious bravery with which they had fought; and the losses on our
side were not insignificant, including, as they did, the
death of Colonel von Degenzieher and Lieutenant Prince Zu
Sonnenwalde-Drachenfels-Schinckenstein, a young man as brave as he was
handsome, both of the 8th Brandenburg (Prince Frederick Charles’s)
Infantry Regiment.

Still, the loss of these two gallant officers, and other brave men on
our side, was more than compensated for by the capture of Alexandrovo
(into which we marched, or rather rushed, with colours flying, and drums
beating) with its rich accumulation of railway rolling stock, which will
be far more precious to us than acres upon acres of military stores.

How in the Heaven’s name the Russians could ever have failed to
concentrate, at the very outset of this war, a more formidable defending
force around so very important a strategic point as Alexandrovo, is a
bewildering puzzle even to those who have busied themselves with the
systematic study of the Russian character; but, at any rate, there
_they_ were and here _we_ are, thanks to the incredible supineness of
our foes, their contemptible outpost service, the audacity and sudden
swiftness of our movements, and the disastrous surprise which we then
sprung upon them.

My courier returns with this despatch to Thorn, where I trust he will be
able to commit it to the wires.




               OCCUPATION OF ALEXANDROVO BY THE GERMANS.


                                                   ALEXANDROVO, _May 3_.

It is not yet twenty-four hours since the victorious 6th Division of the
German Army occupied this place, and already it is bristling on the
Warsaw, or south-eastern side, with a most formidable line of
earthworks, thanks chiefly to the marvellous exertions of the Engineer
Battalion of the 3d Corps, which was quick to arrive here by rail
yesterday, within an hour of our triumph—the first of the campaign. But,
indeed, the spades of all our infantry have also been incessantly at
work since they piled their rifles here, it being thought certain that
the Russians will endeavour to get a double amount of work out of their
cranky, creaking mobilisation machine, and hasten to deliver a desperate
counter-attack, with the view of repairing the disastrous error they
have committed—an error that has placed us in possession of a railway
base of operations of incalculable price. Among other spoils we captured
123 railway waggons of various kinds, and nine locomotives, which, added
to the rolling stock that is hourly pouring in from the direction of
Thorn, with the remainder of the German Army of the Vistula, now rapidly
massing here, render us certain of the means of transport in the event
of our deciding to carry the torch of invasion deeper into the heart of
Russia.

It is true that the railway from here to Warsaw consists of only a
single track, but the gauge, unlike that of all Russian lines on the
right bank of the Vistula, is of the ordinary European size, and that in
itself is a tremendous advantage for us. Our Army of the Baltic, under
Count Waldersee, will be hampered in its forward movements into Russia,
if it decides to push across the frontier also, by the fact that the
line from Eydtkuhnen is a broad-gauge one, though, indeed, it is
understood that the General Staff—prescient in all things—has also made
provision for adapting the axles of German lines to the broader gauge of
Russian; but, on the other hand, the Army of Silesia, under Prince
George of Saxony, will enjoy the same transport facilities as ourselves,
if it can only manage to effect, like us, a _pied à terre_ on the Warsaw
and Vienna line, and we are anxiously awaiting news of its movements.




           CAPTURE OF CZENSTOCHAU BY PRINCE GEORGE OF SAXONY.

               PRINCE ALEXANDER OF BATTENBERG A PRISONER.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                   ALEXANDROVO, _May 4_.

There is great jubilation among the troops here, for, following hard on
the telegram announcing the Emperor’s departure from Berlin to the Rhine
amid an unparalleled scene of excitement and enthusiasm, came a despatch
reporting that Prince George of Saxony, by dint of forced marches of
immense difficulty through the devious moors and marsh-grounds east of
Rosenberg and Tarnowitz on the Kreuzburg-Tarnowitz line, had also
succeeded in surprising the Russians at Czenstochau, on the
Warsaw-Vienna Railway, and, capturing that important place, after a
desperate but unavailing resistance on the part of its defenders, who,
incredible to relate, consisted of not much more than its usual
garrison—a brigade of infantry and two brigades of cavalry. But the
German losses here were much more serious than with us yesterday, one
infantry regiment in particular—the 22d Silesian—being more than
decimated in its desperate, yet successful, endeavours to drive the
enemy from a clump of wood, surmounted by a battery—a proof that it
still continues to be animated by the heroic spirit of its name-chief,
Field-Marshal James Keith, whilom of Inverugie and Dunnottar, in the
Kingdom of Scotland, who, at its head, met his own death, under the eye
of Frederick the Great, when saving the surprised right flank of the
Prussian Army from utter annihilation by the Austrians at Hochkirch in
the Lausitz.

These two engagements, then, though on a smaller scale, have been the
Wörth and Spichern of the present war; and it now only remains to be
seen whether we shall be able to improve upon these initial
successes—which were due to a great extent, I repeat, to the exceeding
swiftness and daring of our own movements, as compared with the
incredible slowness of our foes, and the faultiness of their
mobilisation process, no less than to the fact that the Russians,
imagining the Germans would never dare invade Poland, but remain upon
their guard and form a flanking reserve support in Silesia to their
Austrian allies, directed the main stream of their mobilisation further
to the east, towards Dragomiroff’s line of hostile advance upon Lemberg
and the Carpathian Passes to the south thereof at Stryj.

How Gourko, who is known to be still at Warsaw, though the bulk of his
forces must now be well in front of him, will endeavour to cope with the
situation thus so suddenly created for him, is naturally the question
which occupies all minds here, and it cannot be very long before his
intentions are made manifest.

Meanwhile the telegrams from Galicia, where our Austrian allies have
concentrated the bulk of their forces, are not quite so encouraging,
indicating, as they do, less initiative and promptitude of action on
their part, as well as considerable difference of opinion in the minds
of the Corps and Army Commanders as to whether they ought to remain on
the defensive, or espouse an audacious policy of invasion like
ourselves, and essay to beard the lion, or rather the bear, in his den.

Count von Schlieffen, who proves to be as amiable a man as he is an able
Chief of the Staff, tells me that news reached the German Headquarters
this afternoon of a tremendous conflict between no fewer than five
Cavalry Divisions, three on the Russian side and two on the Austrian,
somewhere near Brod, on the Volhynian frontier—a conflict which
resulted, as it could scarcely otherwise have done from the relative
proportion of numbers, in the total defeat of the Austro-Hungarian
horsemen. The latter, it seems, were covering the movements of the 3d
Austrian Corps, which had been appointed to head an advance in the
direction of Dubno; and when they had been overthrown in a _mêlée_
which, in its colossal magnitude, recalled the mounted conflicts of the
Crusaders, the victorious Russians, rallying and reforming line, swept
down upon a detached portion of the Austrian infantry, regardless of the
smokeless volleys from the Mannlicher repeating rifle, and made awful
havoc among the sturdy men from the Steiermark, taking one whole
battalion prisoners, including, it is rumoured, the colonel of the
regiment, the 27th, who is none other than Count Hartenau, better known
as Prince Alexander of Battenberg, ex-Prince of Bulgaria—a wonderful
piece of luck, indeed, for the Russians, if the rumour proves true.

                                                                  LATER.

Later despatches confirm the rumour of Prince Alexander’s capture by the
Russians, and add that, when the news became known at Dragomiroff’s
headquarters—which are said to be at Dubno—there was almost as much
jubilation as when the intelligence of Napoleon’s surrender flew like
wildfire around the German lines at Sedan.

The ex-Bulgarian Prince is to be sent to St. Petersburg, where rooms are
being already prepared for him at the Katherinenhof, and meanwhile he
has been allowed to retain his sword in order that his unforgiving and
exultant cousin, the Czar, may have the satisfaction of receiving it
from the humiliated captive’s own hands—a picture that will eclipse in
interest all the romantic incidents which have already marked the
Prince’s strangely chequered career.




                     NIGHT ATTACK BY THE RUSSIANS.

   FIGHTING BY THE ELECTRIC LIGHT—ROUT OF GENERAL GOURKO—RETREAT UPON
                                WARSAW.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                            ALEXANDROVO, _May 7_, 5 A.M.

The German Army of the Vistula has just inflicted on the Russians
another Plevna, and they are now in full retreat towards Warsaw. Such,
in brief, is the result of the sanguinary night battle of which I have
just been a witness. The Russians were the first to practise night
attacks as a means of obviating the dreadful losses certain to result
from magazine-rifle fire during the day, but they will long have cause
to remember their first serious application of the nocturnal principle
of modern warfare.

By seven o’clock last night the 3d and 4th German Corps had completed
their concentration at and near this place, and, after extending the
lines of entrenchment begun by the 6th Division on capturing
Alexandrovo, had gone into fireless bivouac on both sides of the railway
line, their tents extending for about a couple of miles in either
direction. Several reconnaissances executed by us during the day had
elicited that the Russians were marshalling in great force at a place
called Waganiek, and were receiving reinforcements from the right bank
of the Vistula, by means of a pontoon bridge which had been thrown
across the stream a little higher up, at Dobrowniki; but, owing to the
dense masses of cavalry which hovered on their front, concealing their
movements as a stage curtain hides from view the shifting of the scenes
in a theatre, it was impossible for our scouts to bring back more
definite information. One item, however, of their intelligence, gathered
from a captured Cossack, had a special interest for us, to wit, that the
Russian forces immediately in front of us consisted mainly of the 5th
and 6th Corps, with part of the 4th (including the relics of
Grodnovodsky’s Brigade), and were under the personal command of General
Gourko, the hero of the Balkans. On the strength of this information it
was decided to attack Gourko before he got his preparations complete,
and for this purpose to break bivouac, and start in quest of him at the
dawn of day, as Prince Frederick Charles had done with Benedek at
Sadowa.

I had spent the evening with a particular friend of mine, Captain von
Jagdkönig, of Stülpnagel’s Brandenburg Infantry Regiment, and was just
on the point of setting out with him on a visit of inspection among the
fore-posts, when a Uhlan dashed up with the intelligence that there were
signs of a mysterious commotion in front, and that something was audible
in the otherwise noiseless night like the distant rumbling of waggon and
cannon wheels. Anon other messengers from the front came spurring in
with similar news, and as the general purport of all these ‘_Meldungen_’
could no longer be doubted, the bugles were at once set to work, and
presently all the silent bivouacs, taking up the shrilling war-note one
after the other, like the multiplication of a distant echo, were
resonant with the thrilling call to arms; and thanks to the severe
training in the discipline of ‘alarms’ which the German army has been
put through by the present Emperor since his accession to the throne,
the army of the Vistula had all started from its sleep and was standing
in perfect battle array, with its face to the suspected foe, within ten
minutes of the first trumpet summons.

The night was intensely dark, the moon having just gone down behind an
impenetrable bank of pitchy clouds, and all fighting seemed to be
utterly out of the question. Presently, however, the inky darkness all
around us was pierced, one may almost say scattered, by a sudden blaze
of light, which, appearing to possess all the illuminating power of the
mid-day sun, flashed lightning-like upon us its blinding beams from the
murky forehead of the midnight sky. ‘The electric light!’ ran from mouth
to mouth, after a moment’s bewildered pause, while every one
instinctively shaded his eyes from the glare of this all-irradiating and
all-penetrating lamp which modern Science had thus hung up to facilitate
the work of slaughter, as if the very sun refused to look any longer
upon human carnage. For some moments the more than mile-long rays of
this blinding ball of light, this detective bull’s-eye of modern
science, swept round the horizon in front of it, as if uncertain where
to fix its focus—now shooting beyond, now falling short of us, and anon
settling on us and suffusing us with a sea of dazzling light. Presently
another, and yet another such luminary burst forth from elevations of
pretty equal distances in front of us, and the process of their groping
about for our lines revealed to us dense masses of grey and dark-green
coated battalions picking their cautious way down the distant slopes in
front of us. For the electric light has this disadvantage, that in
flinging its beams about to discover the locality of foes, it frequently
at the same time unveils the whereabouts of friends. This was the case
here, but our gunners were on the alert, and next time the focus of the
light, in its jerky search-movement, fell on the Russian troops in the
course of their stealthy advance towards us, we opened the concert with
a screaming chorus of shells, accompanied by a rattling orchestration of
small-arms. Nor had we long to wait for the antiphone; for next time the
search-light managed to flood us with its blinding effulgence, the
Russian batteries, which had been planted on the same elevations, gave
lusty voice, and bellowed away at us in most leonine fashion, though
their projectiles, being aimed at much too long a range, flew high over
our heads and left us scatheless. Not so, however, the rifle-rain of our
enemies, which, first in intermittent showers, and then in a steady
downpour, began to fall among our ranks with deadly effect; and the word
was passed from flank to flank for all the infantry to lie down and
court the shelter of our field entrenchments, which crested the ridge of
our line of battle.

Between us and the Russian infantry there intervened a depression in the
ground, a little deeper than that which separates Mont St. Jean from
Belle Alliance; but what enhanced the value of this ground to our foes
was the fact that their batteries in the rear, planted as they were on
the electric light elevations overlooking the terrain, could fire over
the heads of their infantry till the latter was pretty well within
storming distance of our position, much in the same way as the guns of
the 6th Division had been able to do the other day on the occasion of
our first engagement, which resulted in the capture of Alexandrovo.

The Russians advanced against us with a steady, stolid courage worthy of
the men who had essayed to capture the Sand Bag Battery and storm the
redoubts of Plevna; and as the fitful flashes of the electric light
revealed to us, for a few moments at a time, their dense battalions
advancing and deploying into the fighting-lines demanded by modern
tactics and the rules of fire-discipline, I could not help thinking of
that cold and dark November morning when, without the aid of the
electric light, they crowded to their doom, with the same dreadnought
and devoted bravery, up the slippery slopes of Inkerman.

It was not long before the roar of the cannon on both sides became
outvoiced almost by the reverberating rattle of musketry, which was all
the more bewildering, as only the very faintest flashes of flame from
the smokeless powder of both sides served to indicate the exact position
of the opposing lines of infantry fire; and it was only when a new turn
of the electric light (which, by-the-bye, might have changed the course
of Egyptian history, had Arabi enjoyed the advantage of it at
Tel-el-Kebir) registered the progress of the Russian advance, that we
could make out the development of a battle in which unity of command was
simply impossible, and each captain had to be his own general officer.
The development of a modern battle is a very slow process, and this one
was doubly so from the fact, due to the utter darkness in which each
side was occasionally enveloped, that there was much random and
ineffective firing on both parts. But there came a point of time in the
Russian advance when the manipulators of their electric lights found it
impossible to illumine our lines without also including the Russians
within the Asmodean sweep of their rays, and then it was that our men,
seizing their opportunity, plied their magazine rifles with infernal
industry and effect.

But this opportunity did not last long, for suddenly the four midnight
suns of Science, of far more dazzling splendour than the tourist orbs of
the North Cape, which had been rendering possible the work of slaughter,
disappeared from our firmament as completely as if they had been blazing
torches plunged into a pool of ink; and their disappearance was followed
by a brief period of almost painful silence which overspread the broad
and lengthy field of battle.

We never doubted that this pall of pitchy darkness had thus been
suddenly thrown around the battlefield to enable our foes to make
another rush towards us, unimpeded by the accurate aim of shell and
bullet; and a curious thrill, half of pleasure, half of undefined dread,
went shooting through our veins when, as we were listening intently,
peering into the impenetrable darkness beyond, our ears were struck by a
faint peculiar tinkling as if of jangled metal rods, and the meaning
thereof at once became clear to us. The Russians were fixing bayonets,
preparatory to a charge on our position; and the sound was quickly
answered by the loud and stern command: ‘_Aufpflanzen!_’ which ran all
along our lines, and was likewise followed by a repetition, on our side,
of the clinking and sharp clicking above alluded to.

Scarcely had silence in the ranks been again restored when another
order: ‘Load for magazine-fire!’ rang out in stentorian tones, and at
the same time, almost, the electric lights were again flashed full upon
us, converting darkness into open day, and showing us the Russians
striding swiftly towards us in successive irregular waves of
ever-increasing volume, the nearest to us being hardly more than a
hundred and fifty yards off. On they came firing all the way, equally
regardless of the awful volcanoes of shrapnel which our batteries
belched forth against them and of the terrific torrent of our small-bore
bullets, aimed from behind the comparative shelter of field-trench
parapets, which incessantly tore through their stolid ranks, mowing them
down and massacring them by thousands. It was impossible for them to
preserve anything like their proper formation under these trying
circumstances, and disorder was spreading rapidly among their irregular
ranks; but the swaying, struggling masses of the grey and green-coated
soldiery of the Czar still came surging stubbornly up the slope, ever
lessening the distance between them and our entrenchments, till the
moment at last seemed come when they should hurl themselves upon us and
try conclusions with the cold steel. And then, as if by instinct more
than pre-concert, the whole surging masses raised a tremendous shout,
and rushed full upon us with the bayonet.

But when only about twenty paces in front of us, their onward career was
suddenly stopped short by some invisible barrier, which made them crowd
upon each other like penned cattle, passive targets for the bullets of
our repeating rifles that rained upon them thick and fast as hail,
knocking them over like so many rabbits in a ride. This barrier, which
thus strangely stemmed the rush of their storming tide, was composed of
fencing wire of several coils, strongly stretched and impaled, which had
been run along all the front of our entrenched lines as an additional
measure of defence against the contingency of such an attack, and formed
one of the most recent innovations in the field warfare of the
Germans—an innovation which had commended itself to the Emperor, who
himself put it to a practical and approved test at the autumn manœuvres
of last year.

A yell of savage fury rose from the storming columns of the Russians,
who had thus been stopped in their career and baulked of their objective
in this most bloody and calamitous manner; and though the impact of
succeeding waves of assailants soon levelled all the wire fencing with
the ground, still the mass momentum of their charge had been diminished,
their dogged courage had also been shaken by the busy doings of Death
among their huddled ranks during their temporary check; but worst of
all, before the Russians could recover the force of their forward rush,
the Germans were out of their entrenchments and upon them with the
bayonet.

A few moments of grim and ghastly hand-to-hand fighting then ensued—and
let it never after this be said that the bayonet has been entirely
supplanted by the bullet; but I had only time to observe that Gourko’s
brave,—I was almost going to say indomitable,—troops were beginning to
waver, to go down, to yield before the forceful push of the Teutonic
pike, when suddenly again the electric lights of the Russians were
turned off, and the dark curtain of night, in mercy to the vanquished,
fell upon the bloody drama.

Pursuit by the Germans in such circumstances was quite impossible, but,
recovering their ranks with singular precision, they sent salvo after
salvo of artillery and musketry in the direction of the retreating foe,
until the ‘Cease firing’ was sounded all along our victorious line as
the faint and startled dawn began to blush—as if for very shame at such
infernal work; and the bugle-sounds were supplemented by the shrill
whistles of the company commanders, reminding me of the days when I
loved to listen to the clear piping of the darting water-ousel among the
rocky streams of the Grampians, amid scenes unsullied by the bloody hand
of war.

When the day broke the results of the nocturnal battle revealed
themselves in all their ghastly horrors; but, beyond saying that about
10,000 dead and wounded Russians lay in front of our extended lines, and
nearly a third of that number of Germans in and about our own
entrenchments, I will not disgust your readers with a realistic
description of the ghastliness of the battlefield—the first of its kind,
and one which has resulted from an endeavour to neutralise, or at least
minimise, the destructive effects of the murderous magazine-rifle.




                      REPULSE OF THE GERMAN ARMY.


   (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                            ALEXANDROVO, _May 5_, 7 P.M.

This first great victory of ours over the Russians has been somewhat
damped by the news, just received, that our army of Silesia, which had
begun to marshal around Czenstochau preparatory to a further push
forward, has suffered a rather serious reverse at the hands of the Grand
Duke Vladimir, commanding the 14th and 15th Russian Corps d’Armée, who
fell upon Prince George of Saxony before he had completed his
concentration, and compelled him to fall back.

On hearing, however, of Gourko’s crushing defeat by us, and his retreat
towards Warsaw, the Grand Duke Vladimir, like the victorious Wellington
at Quatre-Bras (who desired to effect a junction with Blücher, on the
latter being worsted by the French at Ligny), resolved to forego the
immediate fruits of his triumph and retire to a point that would enable
him to join hands with the retreating Gourko, and thus give combined
battle to the Germans. This point will probably be Skierniwiçe, the
junction-point of the railway lines from Alexandrovo and Czenstochau to
Warsaw, famous in modern history as the pacific meeting-place of the
three Emperors and their Chancellors several years ago.

Skierniwiçe, therefore, will probably be the Waterloo of the
Russo-German portion of the campaign, whoever proves its Wellington; but
Skierniwiçe is very much further from Alexandrovo and Czenstochau than
Quatre-Bras and Ligny were from Mont St. Jean, and some little time,
therefore, must necessarily yet elapse before I shall have it in my
power to chronicle the Waterloo of the present war.




                        EXCITEMENT IN BRUSSELS.


            (_By Telegraph from our Special Correspondent._)

                                                      BRUSSELS, _May 5_.

Brussels to-day is rent by conflicting emotions. Frenzied rage, poignant
anxiety, and boiling excitement are struggling not so much for mastery
as for satisfactory expression. The news of the forthcoming occupation
of Antwerp by a British Army Corps has not been received here with
expressions of unmixed satisfaction. The very fact that the negotiations
were kept wholly secret, with the result that the announcement of so
important a decision first reached us through the public report of the
debate in the House of Commons, has, whether justly or otherwise matters
not, set a vast number of well meaning people by the ears. When the news
reached Brussels yesterday it produced an extravagant sensation which
grew as the night advanced. By tacit consent people refused to go to
bed—clubs and cafés were kept open till morning, and all through the
principal thoroughfares the noise of heated discussions might be heard
in full blast round the tables outside the cafés and at every street
corner. A large section of the population, in which ranked many of the
better classes, were greatly incensed against the King’s Government. ‘It
is not astonishing,’ they said, ‘that the measure was kept secret;
otherwise the people would never have permitted so infamous a traffic!’
All the old arguments of 1859 and the half dozen succeeding years were
revived, and in every group of angry disputants the name of Adelson
Castiau continually recurrent, was flung passionately on the night with
every varied accent of which the human voice is capable. ‘_Il l’a bien
dit, Castiau._ He knew, he foresaw what must happen, and idiots that we
were, we would not listen.’ This was the prevailing cry.

It must be explained that M. Adelson Castiau—who is just at present
given posthumous rank as a hero and patriot—was an eminent lawyer and
ex-deputy, who, from the first, vehemently opposed the fortification of
Antwerp. From the day when in 1859 a committee of twenty-seven officers
were appointed to discuss the subject until the completion of the
immense work some six years later, M. Castiau waged war against the
scheme. He spoke, wrote, organised committees, and headed deputations
protesting against the plan. His argument was that, from a military
point of view, the project involved in principle the abandonment of the
country and a shameful flight by the army towards the ‘Polders de
l’Escaut,’ where certainly no one would ever come to molest it, but
would be quite content to leave it to be destroyed by marsh fevers. The
fortification of Antwerp, he said later, meant the destruction of our
neutrality. Antwerp offers to-day, with her forty kilometres of
heavily-armed works, her citadel and her dozen attached forts, a
standing invitation to invasion. It was handing over the country to the
first comer, and building up one of the finest military and commercial
positions in the world, only for the benefit of England, which had
coveted it for over a century.

And to-day the good people of Brussels, and, I fear of Belgium
generally, are regretfully recalling his words and indorsing his
opinion. Hence the frenzied rage of which I have spoken leaping
flame-like all the length of the Boulevards.

                                              BRUSSELS, _May 7_, 10 A.M.

[Illustration:

  BRITISH TROOPS IN THE PLACE VERTE, ANTWERP.
]

I have just heard that the British Army Corps, under Sir Evelyn Wood,
has reached Antwerp, and that disembarkation is rapidly going forward.
Until the transports with their escort of cruisers and torpedo boats
actually steamed up the river, people here affected to believe that they
would not come. Chatterers in the clubs boasted loudly that the wind of
popular opinion would drive the English vessels back from the shores of
the Scheldt. The obvious absurdity of this anticipation is but
emphasised by the fact that the worthy Antwerpers have received the
invaders, if not with enthusiasm, at any rate with a demeanour at once
friendly and business-like. Telegrams in the clubs here comment rather
bitterly on the fact, that instead of visiting them with haughty
resentment, the townsfolk are doing a lively trade with the alien
soldiers in light beers and other cheap beverages, which the troops are
freely purchasing beneath the Rubens Statue in the Place Verte, where
they are being rendezvoused before proceeding to their billets.

The fear has now grown into dread certainty that what we have always
expected is about to happen. France intends to invade Belgium, and we
have before us the prospect of another Waterloo. Why have the German
troops delayed? It has been set forth again and again by strategists
that Germany’s most obvious plan would be to concentrate her Army Corps
of the North upon the Belgian frontier of France, that it would
therefore be to her advantage either to make use of the two railway
lines which, from Cologne and Aix-la-Chapelle, run to Luxembourg,
Thionville, and Virton—one by way of Trèves and the other by
Verviers—or, and by this even more important results might be obtained,
she might combine with this movement the seizure of the line of the
Meuse, when, by debouching a part of her forces by Chimay into the
Entre-Sambre-et-Meuse, she would be able to attack in flank the French
forces engaged in preventing the Northern Army Corps forcing the passage
of the Meuse between Dun and Mezières.

It was always considered as certain, therefore, that instead of
violating Swiss territory to attack France, Germany would certainly,
immediately on the declaration of war, throw an Army Corps into Belgium.
It was supposed that a German First Army Corps could be concentrated at
Aix-la-Chapelle on the eleventh day of mobilisation, and that it would
be established on the Meuse and on the Sambre to the south of Namur at
latest by the evening of the fifteenth day—that is to say, twenty-four
hours after the Second German Army Corps had deployed before the
position on the Othain.

This has no doubt been Germany’s intention. A huge army is being
concentrated on the Eastern frontier. But France is likely to forestall
the movement, and to reach Namur before her adversary. The extraordinary
rapidity of her mobilisation may be said to be due in great measure to
the perfection of her railway system on the Belgian frontier. She has
established between Dunkerque and Mezières no less than seven lines of
railway, of which four are double lines, which place her in direct and
immediate communication with Belgium. These roads are linked and tapped
by a transversal line that follows the whole length of the frontier as
far as Longwy. Then she has, moreover, on this frontier four huge
entrenched camps capable of serving as manœuvre pivots for her army, and
as supports to her base of operations. These camps are Dunkerque (with
its annexes—Bergues and Gravelines), Lille, Valenciennes (centre of a
system of defence which comprises Condé, Bouchain, and Le Quesnoy), and
Maubeuge. To ensure the retreat of her army in case of failure, she has
created a first line of defence, formed by Valenciennes, Maubeuge,
Landrecies, Hirson, and Mezières. For her second line she has the town
of Reims, surrounded by forts commanding the valleys of the Aisne and
the Marne, and the iron-bound triangle La Fère, Laon, and Soissons which
defends the valley of the Oise, and with the support of Peronne, the
valley of the Somme.

Thus encouraged by the rapidity of mobilisation—a rapidity certainly
never anticipated by Germany, and probably a little unexpected by her
own officers—France has decided to attack Germany by Belgium. The seven
natural obstacles in her path are not in themselves formidable. She has,
indeed, to cross the Meuse, the Lower Rhine, the Teutoburgerwald, the
Weser, the Hartz, and the Elbe. The Teutoburgerwald checked, it is true,
the Legions of Varus, but to-day the great roads pierce it in several
broad cuttings, and it is, moreover, traversed by two railway lines,
running from Hamm to Hanover and Magdeburg. The Hartz also is traversed
by good roads and girdled by two railway lines running to Berlin, one of
which is the line which places the German capital in communication with
Coblentz and Metz. Thus her advance should unquestionably be more rapid
than by the inter-Moselle and the Rhine. If, moreover, she can make good
her footing in Belgium before the German army, she will undoubtedly find
there better roads, better cantonments, and far greater resources of
every kind than she would find in Lorraine and Oldenburg and the
Palatinate.

With this object, we hear that the 1st and 2d French Army Corps are
being concentrated at Maubeuge, the 3d and 10th at Hirson, the 4th and
9th at Givet, and it is expected that all these forces will be united in
the neighbourhood of Namur in the course of the next four days—that is
to say, sooner by five days than any military authorities have believed
possible.

The entire interest in this country is, therefore, centred in Namur, for
which place I start at once.

                                                         NAMUR, _May 8_.

The wildest excitement animates this place. Garrison and townsfolk alike
are filled with generous enthusiasm for the French cause, a rapid change
of feeling which may be attributed in some degree to the Antwerp
episode. The most extravagant rumours are abroad. Belgian co-operation
with the French forces is talked of openly, and with a grandiloquent
disregard of consequences that would be almost amusing if it were not so
grave. It is loudly proclaimed that Chartreuse and the old citadel of
Liége are determined to resist the German advance, and here at Namur
itself the populace (not the army) declare their intention of holding
the ‘Key of Belgium,’ if need be, until their French allies can support
them. As for Namur, its strategical position might well entitle it to be
considered as one of the keys of Belgium. Till lately, however, the
fortifications were in no condition to resist modern artillery. Thanks,
however, to the wisdom of the Belgium Government in adopting the plans
of General Briamont all this has been changed. Within the year 1892 the
fortifications were so far completed as to furnish means for a strong
defence. I give these rumours merely for what they are worth, and to
show the temper of the populace.

As I write this telegram a report reaches me that French troops have
crossed the frontier at Maubeuge and Valenciennes, and it is alleged
that the small Belgian garrisons at Mons and Philippeville, after giving
a wildly enthusiastic reception to their visitors, have valiantly
offered their services to General Saussier.




                    THE MEETING OF THE FOUR FLEETS.

       THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH IN COMMAND OF THE ENGLISH SQUADRON.


We are favoured with another letter from Admiral Colomb, who has been
fortunate enough—in one way—to observe the remarkable naval transactions
in the North Sea:—

‘Not knowing what would happen, or quite what to do, I lay at Colberg,
as being a place less likely to be interfered with by the Russians by
way of blockade than some of the other ports, and to get intelligence of
what was going on. It was here I heard of the violation of the Belgian
territories by France. I thought that the drawing of France into this
step was equally an example of German shrewdness and of French rashness.
I was not at all surprised that we should so suddenly have been brought
into it, in the occupation of Antwerp, which is now being hastened on,
and of course we were bound to mobilise everything we could put our
hands on. I was sure we could never stop at the defence of Belgium. It
seemed equally sure that we could not leave the Baltic, the Belts, and
the Sound in the hands of the French and the Russians, for that would
almost certainly sacrifice Germany. I had seen her hesitate to attack
the Russian Fleet alone, and I was sure that against Russia and France
together, she could only shut her main fleets up in her ports as she did
in 1870 though she is so much more powerful now than she was then. There
was a small German cruiser at Colberg; she trusted to get into shoal
water if a superior Russian found her out—and her captain told me that
he believed the German Government thought as I did in reference to the
policy of attacking the Russian fleet; but that, beside this, they were
alarmed at the crowds of small vessels with heavy guns, which, it was
assumed, might be associated in any naval action in Russian waters. I
only say this as I am told it,—I don’t know anything of the real facts.

‘I thought the appointment of the Duke of Edinburgh to the command in
chief of the North Sea Fleet was a very natural one. His reputation as a
tactician, I had always heard, was first-rate, and naval officers always
seemed ready to depend on and follow him. I was told the command had
been offered to Sir Geoffrey Hornby, but that his medical advisers
absolutely forbid his accepting it; however, he seems to have had a good
hand in the programme.

‘The German officers entirely calculated on France making such an attack
on their Baltic shores as she had proposed to make in 1870. The German
papers rather made light of it, and hammered away on the two points that
France would find it difficult to get transport and appliances, as
Cherbourg and Brest were really her nearest ports; and that England
would step in and prevent a descent if it got as far as that. But the
Germans were everywhere full of preparation on land, and troops were
concentrating at Colberg and elsewhere. I had read in one of our papers
last year that for a long time the bulk of the French Fleet had been
kept at Toulon, and so I was not surprised to see it stated in an
English paper that only five battle-ships had left Brest for the North
Sea, with, however, a good proportion of cruisers and small craft. If,
then, this were really so, it would follow that, supposing the Germans
had been able to bring forward any more ships in the time, and had
repaired the _Oldenburg_, they must be either _à cheval_ between the
French and Russian Fleets—able to strike at each before the other could
assist—or else between two fires; according to how they looked at it. I
had seen them retire before the Russian Fleet on the apprehension of a
French approach. Would they now, with more complete knowledge of the
forces against them, reverse their policy and strike at either? Or would
they remain quiescent; shut themselves up in Wilhelmshaven, and trust to
their land defences to repel all attacks? There seemed almost an even
chance, and I made up my mind to go on to Kiel, and to the Jahde, if I
made out nothing at the first-named port.

‘I had hoped to have made Kiel in daylight, but the wind failing me, it
was dark when I got off the port. I could only guess where I was, for
the Bülk Light did not show, and all I could make out in the way of
lights seemed to be about the works of Friedrichsort, though the regular
light there was also extinguished; thereupon I lay-to. I had the usual
side-lights burning, and I suppose they were seen, for we had not been
there ten minutes lying-to when a ship without lights of any sort came
out of the gloom, and a voice hailed us in an unknown tongue first, and
receiving no response, then in French, asking what we were. I answered,
and presently a boat with a Russian officer boarded us. He was very
polite; told us there were no German warships in Kiel except some small
craft; that a squadron of Russian cruisers was blockading the place; and
that I must get out of it. So there it was, and all I could do was to
make sail for the Sound.

‘Off the Jahde we found quite a strong combined French and Russian
Fleet. We counted seven large French ships and six large Russians, so
that it was clear that the Germans had made no attempt to interfere with
the junction. There were many smaller vessels, chiefly French, and the
whole fleet, except some small vessels, was at anchor.

‘We made for the vicinity of a French flagship, and were soon boarded by
a boat from another ship with some sort of flag up. The officer warned
us that the Jahde was blockaded, and that though, on our promise not to
try to slip in, we might remain with the fleets, we should assuredly be
captured or sunk if we tried to break blockade. As we only wanted to see
what was going on, I readily gave a promise, and then we learnt that the
Russian ships had only joined the French a few hours before we came in
sight, and that no one knew what was going to be done, but it was
ordered that the whole fleet must weigh before dark. The officer told us
they expected transports and troops daily, but that he did not know what
was intended.

‘Immediately after dark; accordingly, the whole combined fleet got under
weigh. Lights were shown during the process, but then all were
extinguished and the ships disappeared without our having the least idea
which direction they had taken.

‘We were astonished soon after daylight next morning to see not only our
friends the Russians and French steaming slowly in from the northward,
but to see an apparently still greater fleet in the haze to the
westward.

‘There was an evident check and hesitation in the Franco-Russian Fleet,
and presently we well understood why, when we distinctly made out the
English white ensign flying in the Western Fleet. Our ships came on
quite slowly. We could make out that they were grouped in three great
masses. I counted fifteen in the most advanced portion, all very large
ships, and I soon made out that they were in three lines, with a
flagship at the head of each. Soon I made out the middle one to be
certainly the _Alexandra_ with an Admiral’s flag at the main. On her
right I supposed was the _Camperdown_, with Vice-Admiral Seymour’s flag;
and on the left the _Anson_, with that of Rear-Admiral Adeane. I had
seen them both before I left England, and supposed they retained their
commands. There were several small vessels near this great mass of
ships, and then to the right of them was a group of seven large ships,
three of them as if partly rigged, and four of them like turret-ships.
Then, again, on the left of the main fleet I could make out what seemed
to be a cluster of smaller vessels.

‘We had barely made out all this, when out of the cloud of mist
overhanging the mouth of the Jahde there came clearly the body of the
German Fleet—ten of them I counted.

‘Never was such an exciting time as this. It seemed to me that I was
about to witness the greatest sea-battle that the world had ever seen,
and when I noticed the Franco-Russian Fleet separating its bigger from
its smaller ships, and drawing the latter into one long line, facing
west, and stretching north and south, I made certain they were going to
run right at the English Fleet pell-mell, in the way I had always read
about.’




                      RETREAT OF FRENCH CRUISERS.

                        SINKING OF THE ‘ELAINE.’


But yet I had not heard of any declaration of war by England, and it
seemed a terribly reckless thing for the French and Russians—of whom I
could only count fourteen in the line they had drawn out, to run down
upon what seemed to be twenty-two English ironclads, when they could be
joined, in a couple of hours perhaps, by the ten Germans. The three
fleets were each about ten miles from my yacht, and I was in the middle
part. There was not much wind, and what there was being from the
southward, left smooth water, but brought down a good deal of mist from
the flat land of which one could only get indications by buildings and
trees sticking up above the horizon. I could not help thinking how wise
the Germans were to have their fleet here rather than at Kiel. Nature
sheltered them from attack at Wilhelmshaven in a way that no sort of art
could do at Kiel, and here they were quite safe behind their shoals, and
yet ready to fall upon their enemies at a moment’s notice.

Nevertheless, they were hemmed in fast enough. That was made plain by
the fact that at least five small French cruisers had turned up at
daylight a long way inshore of where I was, and had evidently been there
all night keeping watch on the port. While I was weighing, these
cruisers, some of which seemed much nearer to our own fleet, appeared to
be coming out—I supposed in obedience to signal—and then I saw that
several German ships were evidently coming out after them, and steaming
at speed. I had hardly realised the state of affairs when I saw I was in
for a hot skirmish, and that we should be in the middle of it ourselves.
However, we put on full speed, and steamed as hard as we could, straight
for the _Alexandra_. Some of the French now passed us in retreat, firing
their stern guns; and presently we were passing between an advancing and
retiring line, and were between two fires. My wife gripped my arm tight
and stood and looked, but never a word she said. Nor I either, for I had
a horror of what might happen, and was powerless.

[Illustration:

  SINKING OF THE YACHT ‘ELAINE.’
]

‘What’s that?’ cried my wife presently, pointing to the sky over the
German ships. What, indeed? I was only conscious that some monstrous,
roaring, and very relentless thing had passed me, and made a crash
somewhere, and that my steward had torn up the hatchway, crying, ‘Good
God! the bottom’s out of the ship!’

Then I knew that a German projectile had passed through our deck and
planking below, and that we were sinking. I holloaed down to the
engineer, ‘Keep her going as long as you can!’ dashed down for my wife’s
jewel-box, collared it, and was up again to find the men clearing away
the boat. I knew the engine-room compartment was by way of being
water-tight, and that we had a little time to spare in consequence; but
I wanted to run out of the fire, which I could not do in the overcrowded
boat. My engineer was as cool and white as marble. ‘She’ll go a bit yet,
sir!’ he called up through the skylight; ‘the water’s leakin’ in through
them sluices pretty, but there ain’t more nor six inches yet.’

The boat was down, towing alongside, and I gave the word to quit the
yacht as she was sinking markedly by the stern. The engineer came
regretfully last into the boat before myself. ‘Them blooming engines ’ll
go a bit yet,’ he muttered as he passed me. ‘I’m glad it worn’t a
Rooshian shot anyhow.’ It was no use sticking to the yacht, but she had
done us the good turn of carrying us out of the line of fire, which,
indeed, was slackening by reason of the approach of the French to their
own fleet.

The whole thing was such a scurry that one hardly knew what had, and
what had not happened, but we understood it when my poor _Elaine_, with
a great snort and splash, suddenly threw her nose into the air and went
down stern first, leaving us in the overcrowded boat, clear now of the
cross fire which had, indeed, nearly ceased. Then I became aware of two
things; one, that a heavy English cruiser, with a flag of truce flying,
was steaming towards the Franco-Russian Fleet; and next, that a smaller
ship was steering direct for my boat. In a very few moments we found
ourselves safe on board the _Blonde_, kindly welcomed and commiserated
by Commander Pretyman, who told us he had been signalled to pick us up
and take us to the flagship.




                         ON BOARD THE FLAGSHIP.

  ACCEPTANCE OF THE ENGLISH TERMS BY THE RUSSIAN AND FRENCH ADMIRALS.


The change was sudden and unexpected enough when we found ourselves
greeted by the Duke the moment we put foot on board the _Alexandra_. My
old friend Keppel had, we found, already turned out of his cabin to make
room for my wife; and the Duke led us—still rather dazed—into his
after-cabin, assuring us that we were his welcome guests till he could
send us home. I could not help wondering at the moment at the quietness
of his manner and his exceeding urbanity on the brink of such tremendous
occurrences and with such awful responsibilities on his shoulders. I
found I was by no means alone in my admiration of this amiable _aplomb_,
but I soon learnt that not only the Duke, but most of the officers did
not apprehend a collision.

For the situation was that war with France had not yet been formally
decreed, and that the flag of truce had gone with the Duke’s Flag
Captain, Brooke, to ‘invite’ the French to withdraw their forces, in
which case no attack would be made, and the Russians might retire
unmolested to Cronstadt. If, however, in three hours the Russian
Squadron had not separated from the French, and the French had not
signified their acquiescence, the united English and German Fleets
together would enforce compliance. The Duke’s secretary, Mr. Rickard,
showed me the copy of the message. It was exceedingly firm, but
exceedingly conciliatory; praying the French Admiral Planché and the
Russian Shestakov to reflect that, in presence of forces so enormously
superior, their honour could in no way be touched, and that common
dictates of humanity forbade the awful effusion of blood which would be
so uselessly shed in the event of a refusal.

The ships were all prepared for action,—those with masts appearing to be
nearly stripped,—and now I saw that the German Fleet was well out, and
steaming directly for us. The officers all seemed a good deal more
excited than the Admiral, but still I found that no one believed in the
possibility of resistance. The latest news by a despatch vessel
represented that the embarkation of troops at Cherbourg, which was
closely watched by several of our cruisers, had apparently been stopped,
and this, it was felt, gave additional cause to believe in a peaceable
solution, as it was made clear that even if the English Fleet only
stopped the transports, the whole Franco-Russian game was up. A last
telegram from Paris, _viâ_ Madrid, expressed belief that the French
Admiral Prémesnil had sailed with orders to return to Brest if the
English appeared in observation off the Jahde in greatly superior force.

Notwithstanding, there was not a glass in the ships that was not
persistently directed upon the _Immortalité_—now about ten miles off,
and stopped close to the French Flagship—and her great white flag, for
it had been arranged that she should hoist the Dutch ensign under it as
the signal that the terms were rejected.

The hours drew on, and for perhaps two there was no sign. The distance
was too great to make out ordinary flag signals, but sometimes it could
be seen that such were hoisted, and one of the signal midshipmen created
a fresh stir by affirming that the ships in view were ‘stoking up.’

My heart was in my mouth with the excitement of the moment, but if I was
as cool and unconcerned in outward appearance as the officers and men
surrounding me, I must have wonderfully belied my real feelings.
Suddenly the head signalman called out in a hurried voice, not taking
his eye from his glass: ‘The Russians are moving, sir!’

We could not in fact distinguish French from Russians at the distance,
but I had told them that the Russians were on the right wing, and as
they looked, they could see the right wing opening out from the left. A
sort of disappointed sigh passed round the group, as by a single impulse
they dropped their glasses and looked at one another. I am sure I saw an
impatient gesture of the Duke’s right arm, and a certain setting of his
lips which confirmed it. There was no Dutch ensign. Common sense had
overcome the sentiment of the allies; the terms were accepted, and the
Russians were off to the Gulf of Finland.

All this surmise was confirmed when Captain Brooke returned on board;
but I never saw complete disappointment so unmistakably betrayed as it
was on his face, that of the Admiral and the other officers who received
him at the gangway.

I have little more to say. The French Fleet presently passed us,
steering to the westward. The Duke detached twelve of his battle-ships
under Sir Michael Seymour with seven or eight cruisers—all newest types
of ships—to follow up the Russians into their own waters, while he
himself followed up the French with the remainder of his fleet. My wife
and I were sent on board the _Thames_ which came home full speed with
the news.

I remain in a kind of mental paralysis. No one had ever suggested to me
that in the presence of British power, naval war was to become but naval
peace. All the naval people whom I had ever heard talk about it always
seemed to have in their minds a certainty that in naval war, no two
hostile fleets could ever see one another without rushing to a mutual
destruction pell-mell. And yet I could get away from the fact that to
every Frenchman and every Russian in the combined fleet I had seen, it
must have been clear that no one but a madman could have pursued any
other course than that which their Admirals followed. Of course it might
have been different had war been actually declared.




     PREPARATIONS FOR THE LANDING OF BRITISH TROOPS AT TREBIZONDE.

 THE PROTECTION OF ERZEROUM—TURKS, LIKE THE ENGLISH, AS USUAL, TOO LATE.


        (_From our Special Correspondent, Mr. Francis Scudamore._)

                                                KARAKURGHAN, _April 29_.

I owe the opportunity afforded me for writing to you from this wretched
place to an accident which has befallen my best horse, and will delay me
possibly for another couple of days. The mischance is doubly unfortunate
at this moment, inasmuch as reports from our front lead to the
supposition that an important engagement is at hand. Any adequate
analysis of the rumours that reach me constantly, contradictory as they
are, continually varied, chequered with additions and omissions, and
burdened with the extravagant local interest environing some wholly
trivial circumstance, would be as entirely out of the question for me as
for any of your readers at home. Indeed, your readers are certainly
infinitely better informed than I am as to current events.

When I left Trebizonde, five days ago, the town was in a state of
fevered anxiety, of enthusiastic anticipation, tempered in some sober
quarters by a quiet but not ungenerous scepticism born of previous
experience. The English were coming, cried the enthusiasts. Three
English Army Corps (Heaven alone knows whence it was proposed to get
them) were on their way to Trebizonde, to Samsoun, and to Shumla to aid
their Turkish and Italian allies. The eastern division of the
Mediterranean Fleet had already entered the Black Sea, as much to the
surprise (and perhaps, somewhat to the chagrin) of the Turkish
commanders at the Dardanelles and the Kavaks as of the generals of
Russia and of France. In Trebizonde and the surrounding villages a
certain basis of probability was built beneath these rumours by the fact
that English agents had, for a week, been purchasing mules, sheep, and
cattle, at, as is usual with British agents in times of stress, some
five times their market value to any other purchaser. Nor have the
native producers profited more than usual by this large-handed
generosity, for some two or three Greek and Armenian traders,
anticipating, as is their wont, honest English procrastination, have
been beforehand with the army agents, with whom they are now dealing at
altogether fancy prices. This, however, is after all but a small matter
beside the great question of our intervention. That England’s action
should invariably be delayed almost (but never quite) until too
late—that her transports should reach their destination empty, her
troops be either unprovided with cartridges, or supplied with those of
some obsolete and useless pattern—that by every mistake ineptitude can
secure or official ignorance produce, all arrangements connected with
the disembarkation and provisioning, and general welfare of whatever
forces have been tardily despatched, must inevitably break down but for
the tireless energy, the unfailing resource, the unremitting good temper
and never-flagging loyalty of all the officers and men thus maltreated,
are matters which have long since come to be as well known abroad as
they are beginning to be recognised at home. ‘The English,’ said the
good people of Trebizonde, while awaiting the expected Army Corps, ‘are
good but careless. They are richer than the Russians, and they are less
corrupt, but they are also more stupid.’ This, as the independent
criticism of allies, more than anxious to be generous, is worth at least
a second thought.

[Illustration:

  BRITISH TROOPS LANDING AT TREBIZONDE.
]

I would gladly have witnessed the disembarkation of our troops (for
aught I know it may have already taken place), but, after fruitlessly
waiting many days in dreary Trebizonde, I no longer dared to delay. News
had come that a large Russian force was advancing from Kars westward
towards Erzeroum, and, although there are in and around that place some
50,000 Turkish troops, yet, save at Keupru Kui, a place about nine
hours’ ride from Erzeroum on the Kars road, little or no preparation
appears to have been made to resist an enemy. Erzeroum, let it be
remembered, is entered by three posterns, called respectively the
Stamboul, the Ardahan, and the Kars gates. The roads from them lead to
Ardahan, Kars, Van, Erzinghan, and Trebizonde. On the south of Erzeroum,
at a very short distance from the walls, a mountain descends steeply
towards the city, which it altogether commands, and a direct road runs
from Van to Moush, and from that town to the mountain, from which two
water channels lead into Erzeroum. If an enemy once had possession of
the eminence—and, so far as I can learn, there is little or nothing to
prevent him—he would be able to turn these water-courses off from the
city. There are, it is true, a few wells within the walls, but the
supply from them is already insufficient for the requirements of the
population, without taking into account the troops quartered in and
around the town. It seems typical of Turkish apathy that so little
should have been done to secure this their last great stronghold in Asia
Minor from attack. I am going, of course, merely by what I hear from
Turkish officers, as I have as yet been unable to see for myself; but I
have hitherto had no reason to discredit their information.

It appears that from time to time, since 1878, proposals have been made
for fortifying various strong natural positions, but that, with a
procrastinatory belief in the protection of Providence that is wholly
Turkish and almost English, these plans have been continually set aside
until it is now too late to execute them. Thus on the Van Road, about
five miles from Erzeroum, there is an admirable position known as the
Palandukain defile. This position was protected after a fashion in 1876,
when a fort was constructed capable of offering sturdy resistance.
Another fort had been built also at that time at Gereguzek, eighteen
miles from Erzeroum, on the Ardahan road. Another position, that of the
Devé Boinou Bogaz, five miles from Erzeroum, on the Kars road, was
considered at that time to be a good place for a fort, and yet further
defences were then constructed at the Loghana defile, which is some
twenty-four hours from Erzeroum, on the Kars road. There are, no doubt,
also important positions on the Bayazid road, as, for instance, at Deli
Baba—a narrow gorge through high mountains, which the Turks declare to
be impregnable—at Taher Gedi, five hours’ march further on, and at Kara
Kilissa, beyond which there is a level road to Bayazid. Since the war,
however, it appears that little or nothing has been done to strengthen
or even to maintain these positions in an adequate state of defence.
There has been much talk of late in Constantinople of extensive
armaments on this frontier. Krupp guns have, it has been said, been sent
to supplement the bronze cannon manufactured at Tophané, with which the
forts of Erzeroum were in the last war mainly armed. As to whether any
such material has reached its destination I am as yet uninformed. People
on this road, which it must surely have traversed, profess to know
nothing of it. It is to be feared that we may expect a repetition of the
famous story of the million liras expenditure said to have been incurred
in the fortification of Erzeroum in the last war.

I did not journey from Trebizonde alone, but took advantage of the
departure of a huge straggling convoy of mules and pack-horses laden
with ammunition for Erzeroum. There were also with us half a dozen
English doctors who have taken service with the Porte, and have
volunteered to attend the wounded under fire. Owing to the accident to
my horse, who slipped, poor brute, through a ragged hole in the wide
stone bridge across the Kara Su, close to this place (a terrible pitfall
for artillery), and badly scraped both his own shin and his master’s,
these gentlemen have perforce abandoned me until such time as I can
obtain another beast.

The traffic through this little place, which is the point of junction of
the Trebizonde and Erzinghan roads to Erzeroum, and as a rule at this
season is almost deserted, is in itself indicative of stirring events in
our front. All through the day there has been a continuous passage of
nondescript wayfarers in either direction. Turkish soldiers—stragglers
or deserters may be—some sick, some slightly wounded; Koordish
Bashi-bazouks, pure bandits for the most part, flashing great arsenals
of gleaming weapons in their waist-belts, and armed, many of them, with
Winchester rifles, remnants of the last war; slim, evil-visaged
Circassians on lean, wiry horses, and gaunt Zaibeks, ferocious beneath
their extravagant headgear, have tramped and clattered continuously past
the miserable khan where I am established. Some of these gentry, I note,
have Russian great-coats with regimental numbers on the shoulder strap,
flung either across their cruppers, or around their shoulders. This is a
sure indication that there has at least been some skirmish or
reconnaissance in which Russian arms have suffered not a little.




                        REPULSE OF THE RUSSIANS.

         THE TURKS PURSUE ESKI ZAGRA—THE GRIM REALITIES OF WAR.


                                              NEAR KEUPRU KEUI, _May 2_.

I am profiting by an opportunity to send you a hurried message by a
Turkish officer on his way to Erzeroum with despatches. Soon after
writing last to you, I managed to pick up a horse—a poor beast enough
truly, in place of my stalwart grey—and pushed on to Erzeroum. There I
found all in confusion. Certain news had arrived of a Russian advance in
force along the Kars road, and every available man had been thrown
forward to meet it. It was but natural that the Russians should seize
the earliest possible opportunity of hurling themselves against the
Turkish stronghold, which they might very reasonably expect to find
unprepared to receive them. More or less unprepared the Turks indeed
were, but Ghazi Moukhtar Pasha—the hero of ’77—who had himself reached
Erzeroum but a few days since, was fully determined not to permit his
traditional enemy to win an easy triumph. As I have said, every
available regiment was ordered to meet the attack, and hurried forward
to Keupru Keui, where the stand was to be made. I have as yet no
details—indeed, as I stayed but an hour or so in Erzeroum to feed my
horses, I have hitherto been able to see no one in authority; but so far
as I can gather, the Turks, though outnumbered, were not greatly
inferior to their adversaries, over whom they had the additional
enormous advantage of being in a position which tradition has taught
them to regard as well-nigh impregnable. In any case Turkish arms seem
to have gained a signal victory.

Very soon after leaving Erzeroum, which I did shortly before mid-day
this morning, I began to meet with unmistakable evidences that a big
battle had either been fought or was in progress. First a knot of some
twenty infantrymen, weary, haggard, and ragged, met me on the steep
slope of the hill some five miles beyond the town. They were all jaded
beyond expression—every one was wounded more or less grievously—several
were using their rifles as crutches, and some who had lost or abandoned
their rifles were helping themselves along either by the aid of their
comrades’ shoulders, or by stakes, or waggon-boards, or rammers, or
indeed any of the miscellaneous articles of wood or metal that are to be
found strewn along the line of a straggling fight. I gave them a
water-skin, and offered a bottle of brandy (as _ilitch_—medicine for
their wounds). The water they took, but none would touch the spirit save
one gaunt, white-moustached veteran, who mumbled incoherencies about
Algeria, by way seemingly of excuse. While they drank I asked them what
was doing. ‘A great battle was being fought,’ they said, but their
opinions were divided as to the course of the action; several men (weak
from loss of blood) opined that the enemy was too strong for them. But
one broad-shouldered, bright-eyed little fellow, who had had all the
flesh of one cheek torn from him by a shell splinter, and had bound the
wound with a strip from his rough serge jacket, was loud in his derision
of this view. ‘It was Eski Zagra again,’ he said. The Moskoffs were
driven back, beaten hopelessly, and pursued by agile Bashi-bazouks
through the slippery passes, the precipitous fastnesses, the treacherous
paths of the rugged route, a pursuit without cess or quarter—where every
enemy, whether wounded or not, was exultingly slaughtered as soon as
caught. The little veteran illustrated with horribly realistic gestures
his own views as to the treatment of Russian wounded. With a foul gusto
that raised wild enthusiasm in his weary comrades, he demonstrated how
he would hew off the noses and lips of his enemy; how he would gouge out
their eyes with his bayonet before he plunged it into their throats and
twisted it till the victims died suffocated with their own blood. He
outlined other horrors, but I had had enough, and left him posing in
anticipation as a hero among his fellows, while I rode on towards this
place.

That this fierce implacable Moslem had been right in his conjecture I
soon had ample—ay, terrible—proof. In every mile, even on the rugged
track itself, as I neared the spot from which I write, the horrible
evidences of deadly carnage multiplied and repeated themselves.
Disembowelled horses, broken limbers, little mounds of dead, fallen one
on another, their still, calm, white faces in cruel contrast to the
extravagant distortion of their scattered and twisted limbs; and
everywhere traces of that ruthless hatred vowed by the Turk to his
hereditary enemy. Hideous featureless corpses stared at me out of
eyeless sockets from the roadside, their hands uplifted and bloody,
showing that wounded, not dead Russians, had been thus maltreated;
occasionally a movement, slight though perceptible, caused me to
dismount, eager to aid some mutilated sufferer, but all to no
purpose—the Turks had done their work too well. As I advanced, the
spectacle of these recurrent horrors increased in its revelations of
barbarism and malignant cruelty. The number of Turkish dead diminished
step by step, as that of the Russians augmented, and by the time I
reached this place I had had such a surfeit of ghoul-feasting (for the
eye) as I envy no man.

While talking to Salem Bey Agris—the gentleman to whose good offices I
am indebted for the conveyance of this hurried despatch, at least, as
far as Erzeroum—a poor horse hobbled up, browsing its way along the thin
coarse grass which covers the bank on which I was seated. Something in
the animal’s movements attracting my attention, I looked up and noticed
to my infinite horror that the poor brute, which was still saddled and
bridled, had but three legs—the off fore leg being from the shoulder
downwards nothing but a sliver of white bone splintered to a pencil
point. Horror-struck, I seized my revolver—my first thought being to put
the poor creature out of its pain. But as it browsed on placidly,
seemingly indifferent, I called Salem Bey’s attention to its condition.
‘Poor horse,’ he said (and note that he had surveyed mutilated Russians
with placid indifference), ‘a suffering animal, indeed, tears the
breast, but I have seen, only two hours since, a sight far more
heartrending than this. I was charging with my squadron a troop of
Cossacks. It chanced that a shell burst right over the first line, and,
killing two troopers, tore away the whole muzzle of one of their horses.
All was destroyed in the poor beast, right up to the eyes, and you might
have supposed it would fall dead at once. Nothing of the kind. It held
its place in the ranks, spouting torrents of blood and foam from its
ghastly shattered head, until, fortunately, some stray Russian bullet
laid it low. Until then, I will own,’ he added, ‘I was afraid for my
men.’

The Bey, leaving me to digest this tale, strode away in the dusk to get
his horse. ‘Where is your army?’ I have shouted to him, and his reply
is: ‘_Bilémem_ (I do not know). INSHALLAH, it has gone to KARS.’




         THE RUSSO-GERMAN CAMPAIGN—GREAT BATTLE AT SKIERNIWIÇE.

 ROUT OF THE RUSSIANS AND THEIR RETREAT ON WARSAW—HEAVY FIGHTING ON THE
                           GALICIAN FRONTIER.


         (_From our Special Correspondent, Mr. Charles Lowe._)

                                                  SKIERNIWIÇE, _May 18_.

Strange is the irony of events. In the month of September 1884, this was
the friendly meeting-place of the Emperors of Russia, Germany, and
Austria, who were accompanied by their respective Chancellors—Bismarck,
Kalnoky, and Giers; and now the chateau where they so ostentatiously
feasted, embraced, and exchanged their pledges of peace, is a heap of
smoking ruins. After this, who shall say that there is any stability in
human affairs, or any trustworthiness in human foresight?

The united Russian forces, consisting of the 5th and 6th Corps under
General Gourko, and the 14th and 15th Corps under the Grand Duke
Vladimir, have to-day suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the
combined German armies of the Vistula and Silesia, commanded by the King
of Saxony, and are now in full retreat on Warsaw. As I predicted in my
last despatch, this has been the Waterloo of the Russo-German portion of
the campaign, and it has been brilliantly won by the Germans—thanks
mainly to the disconcerting effects of smokeless powder on the tactics
of an enemy who fights better in the mass than in detail, no less than
to the fact of the Russians having committed the radical error of
provoking a war before they were completely equipped with the new
magazine rifle, which, even with the aid of the French factories that
received orders for half a million of the new weapon, will not be served
out to the entire army of the Czar before the summer of 1894.

In my last despatch I recorded how the Grand Duke Vladimir, in spite of
his victory over the German Army of Silesia at Czenstochau, had
refrained from following up his success in consideration of Gourko’s
repulse at Alexandrovo, preferring—like Wellington, who had similarly
beaten Ney at Quatre Bras, but was yet desirous of succouring the
retreating Blücher, who had come to grief in front of Napoleon on the
same day at Ligny—to retire towards Warsaw for the purpose of joining
hands with his fellow-commander, on the latter being worsted by the King
of Saxony. The distances, of course, were infinitely greater in the
present case; but otherwise the principles of strategy were the same.

A glance at the map will show that the junction-point for Gourko and the
Grand Duke Vladimir could only have been Skierniwiçe, where the railways
from Alexandrovo and Czenstochau converge; and it appears that, though
the Grand Duke’s line of retreat to the common rendezvous was
considerably the longer of the two, nevertheless the bulk of his forces
had reached it first, by reason of the fact that he enjoyed a double
line of rails, whereas Gourko had to move as best he could along a
single track.

The German Army of the Vistula, with which I had thrown in my lot as a
witness of the war, was not slow to gather itself together after the
battle of Alexandrovo, and start in pursuit of Gourko’s shattered
forces, but much precious time was lost by us in repairing bridges which
our retreating foes had blown up; and though at last, by dint of great
exertions on our part, the railway proved not altogether unavailable to
us for transport purposes, still the earlier stages of our advance on
Warsaw simply assumed the form of an ordinary march along, and parallel
with, the line, the engineers pontooning or planking any bridgeless
stream or ravine which obstructed our progress.

At Vlokavek, which our advanced guard reached on the fifth day after the
battle of Alexandrovo, though the distance is only about thirty miles,
we were considerably hampered, and even hurt, by the flanking fire of a
Russian battery, which had established itself in a safe position on the
right bank of the Vistula—a battery, strange to say, which was
unsupported by any body of infantry of which we could discover trace;
and the King of Saxony, who, in spite of his sixty-four summers, is
still almost as vigorous and alert as when he commanded on the Meuse,
determined to imitate, though, of course, on a very much smaller scale,
the celebrated passage of the Douro by Wellington (of which, by the way,
this was, curiously enough, the anniversary, the 12th May). Accordingly,
the 3d battalion of the ‘Old Dessauers’ Magdeburg regiment, under Major
von Wusterhausen, was stealthily ferried over the Vistula, which is here
both broad and deep, at the dead of night; and, performing a silent and
circuitous march to the rear of the Russian battery, it opened a heavy
fire on the bewildered Muscovites, just as the latter, profiting by the
breaking dawn, were about to begin their usual day’s work of pounding
away at our advancing columns; and, charging with a cheer up to the
emplacements, before the pieces could be reversed, the ‘Old Dessauers’
killed or captured every one of the gunners. For this smart and
effective feat of arms Major von Wusterhausen will doubtless receive the
Iron Cross of the first class and the rank of colonel.

This was the main incident which marked the course of our advance,
though I might fill columns by recounting the minor vicissitudes of our
march, especially the intolerable botheration which was occasioned us by
the clouds of Cossacks and Dragoons—the latter little more than mere
mounted infantry—who pertinaciously hovered on our flanks in search of
fitting opportunities for harassing us, and had ever and anon to be
brushed away like so many troublesome swarms of mosquitoes.

In the meantime the telegraph had kept us duly informed of the various
stages in the forward movement of the army of Silesia along the other
and longer side of the triangle, of which Skierniwiçe is the apex, and
it was naturally enough our endeavour so to time our junction with it as
to render it impossible for the Russians to attack our two armies
severally and beat them in detail, even if they should have the stomach
to assume the offensive, which we gravely doubted.

When our headquarters had reached Lowitz, which is only about fourteen
miles from Skierniwiçe, and established itself in a pretty chateau,
Arcadia by name, belonging to the Radziwill family, an officer of the
Empress Frederick’s Posen Hussars (Death’s Heads), who had made a long
and venturesome ride across country from Lipce, came spurring in with a
despatch from Prince George of Saxony, announcing that the combined
Russian forces under Gourko and the Grand Duke Vladimir had taken up a
strong defensive position behind the Lupta brook (which runs into the
Bzura, an affluent of the Vistula), with their left resting on a
village, Stryzboga, and their right on another hamlet, Dromiloff, their
centre being Skierniwiçe. The left half of their line, defended by the
troops of the Czar’s eldest brother, was formed by the Lupta itself, a
brook about the size of the Bistritz at Sadowa; while the right half was
thrown back from this streamlet at an angle of about twenty-five
degrees, so as to profit by some ridgy ground in its rear. Prince George
of Saxony, therefore, invited his royal brother to attack General Gourko
with all energy on the morrow, while he himself would simultaneously
assail the position of the Grand Duke Vladimir, a proposal which King
Albert, after brief consultation with his Staff, declared his readiness
to act upon.

Accordingly, two hours before dawn, all our troops were under arms, and
in motion for the various positions which had been assigned them. On our
half of the Russian front the 3d (Brandenburg) Corps, with the 7th
Division, advanced to open the attack, while the 8th Division acted as
reserve, and our two Cavalry Divisions were directed to keep a look-out
on our left flank, adapting their action to the nature of the ground and
the development of the infantry portion of the fight. Between us and the
enemy the terrain was pretty wavy with occasional patches of crops and
cover, while in front of Skierniwiçe it rose into a gentle slope, on the
top of which spread the extensive wood forming the deer park and game
preserves of the castle (famous for its Three Emperors’ Meeting), of
which the turrets were just visible above the tree-tops. This, as I
said, formed the centre of the Russian position; and it was by opening
our guns in this direction that we began the battle, with the view of
making the enemy believe that our main objective was the middle of their
line.

For a couple of hours or so the fight was nothing but an artillery duel
at long range, and it was plain that although the Russian artillery was
more advantageously posted, it had the utmost difficulty in finding the
range, and even the exact position of our guns, owing to the comparative
smokelessness of their discharges. On the other hand, after the Russian
outposts had been driven in, the Jäger Battalion of the 3d Corps, which,
courting every dip in the ground, had stealthily crept forward for some
considerable distance in a hollow beyond our batteries, and lined the
edge of a rye-field, within about 3000 metres of the Russian guns,
opened fire at this very long range, and not without fatal effects; for
with a good glass we could see the Russian artillerists dropping beside
their pieces, a fact which made us realise the truth of the German
Emperor’s remark that, if field guns are to hold their ground as weapons
of modern warfare, their range must still be further increased beyond
that of the newest form of small bore rifle.

To emphasise the impression produced by this combined artillery and
musketry fire—of such a galling and invisible kind—we made a show of
manœuvring large bodies of infantry over against the Russian centre, as
if in preparation for an attack in force; and presently we could discern
that this feint movement on our part was responded to by the pushing up
of more of the enemy’s force from either flank into the woods of
Skierniwiçe, for the purpose of giving us a reception lacking nothing in
warmth should we have the temerity to essay an entrance there.

While this renewed concentration in the Russian centre was going on, a
curious incident happened, which puzzled us not a little at first. This
was the sudden emerging from the wood of what appeared in the distance
to be several squadrons of cavalry, which headed straight for our lines,
and came careering down right on the rye-field where the Jäger Battalion
before-mentioned, from its concealed position, was playing such sore
havoc among the Russian gunners with their long range and invisible
fire, and we doubted not that their whereabouts had at last been
discovered. Accordingly, while our guns loaded with shrapnel, word was
passed to the Stendal Hussars, who, acting as cavalry of the 7th
Division, were standing ensconced in a hollow on the rear flank of our
batteries, to prepare for hurling themselves upon these presumptuous
horsemen. But this counter attack proved to be unnecessary; for
presently we could discern that the Russian steeds were riderless, and,
on coming nearer, they turned out to be only a huge herd of very fine
deer, which had been scared out of their leafy haunts in the forest of
Skierniwiçe by the infernal pother going on there. It may be remembered
that, in his narrative of the battle of Königgrätz, the late Count
Moltke referred to a similar incident.

Meanwhile, our real object, which was the delivery of our main attack on
the right flank of the Russians, was being successfully attained. It can
scarcely be expected that I, or any other single eye-witness, should be
able to detail the incidents and development of a battle which extended
along a line of more than six miles, as the reasons which preclude a
General from exercising anything like unity of command over so vast an
area form an equal restraint upon the War Correspondent’s power of
all-embracing observation. Even of conflicts like Königgrätz and Sedan,
a pretty complete description of a general kind could always be given by
one pen by reason of the smoke which betrayed the whereabouts of friend
and foe and the fluctuations of the fight; but now that science has
robbed war of one of its most picturesque appendages, a modern battle by
day is a most bewildering spectacle. You hear the roar of cannon and the
rattle of musketry, but this incessant thunder is accompanied by no
lightning-flash. You see men flinging up their arms and falling around
you, but know not whence they received their death-wounds any more than
if they had been stricken down by the invisible arrows of the Sun-God
Apollo.

Naturally enough this must have a most demoralising effect on all
soldiers, and when Blücher at Lingy said: ‘My men like to see the
enemy,’ he was only characterising the fighting men of most nations.
Still, as far as I could discover, the German Infantry were less
disconcerted by these unseen terrors of modern war than were their
Russian foes, who are most dour and indomitable devils when they can
fight shoulder to shoulder and in the mass, but lose much of their
_morale_ and their dogged powers of resistance when each man has mainly
to rely upon his own intelligence (not a very marked feature of the
Slavonic soldier), his own initiative, and his own isolated sources of
courage. Indeed, we thought we could now and then detect traces of panic
among the soldiers of the Czar; and in one case, at least, we distinctly
saw an officer draw his revolver on some of his men who would rather
have fled than fallen before a foe whom they could neither see nor feel.

In spite, however, of these demoralising influences which were at work
among the scattered ranks of the Russians, they held their ground with
singular tenacity; and the battle had thus raged for hours without our
being able to carry out completely our main purpose, which was, under
cover of the feint attack that we had directed against the enemy’s
centre, to turn his right and roll him up—a manœuvre, as we knew, which
Prince George of Saxony was equally fain to accomplish with the Russian
left.

About noon, however, the scales of victory were suddenly turned in our
favour in the following manner. The day was bright, clear, and warm, and
though the battlefield immediately in front of the knoll occupied by
King Albert and his Staff (to which I had attached myself) was
completely free from powder-smoke, the horizon behind the Russians all
at once began to grow clouded with a long line of thick yellow dust,
which floated ever nearer and nearer to us in dense billowy volumes like
a huge, irregular wave of muddy sea foam. I saw the King exchange
glances of intelligent meaning with the various members of his Staff,
but did not myself comprehend the meaning of the phenomenon, until the
rolling dust-cloud began to be relieved by sparks and glintings such as
are emitted by mica from a grey hillside, and then it flashed upon me
all at once that these coruscations of light in a whirlwind of dust
could only come from the flashing of the sun’s rays on the sabres,
helmets, and lances of our cavalry.

And so it was. For our Two Divisions of Horse, numbering in all
thirty-two squadrons, starting betimes, had stolen away through Lowitz,
up the right bank of the Bzura, and fording this stream above its
confluence with the Ravka, had mounted this other brook and crossed it
at Bolimoff, where they were fairly in the rear of the Russian right, on
which they thus came thundering down. I had seen operations of this kind
repeatedly carried out at the autumn manœuvres in Germany, but deemed
them _Kriegspiel_ in the literal sense of the word—and not to be thought
of or hazarded in real warfare. Yet here was a vivid proof that the
Germans are terribly earnest, even in their military pastimes, and that
they only apply in war what they practise in peace. I daresay, however,
King Albert would never have sanctioned so bold a venture had he not
discovered early in the day that the Russians had shifted the bulk of
their cavalry to their left flank as being the more exposed of the two,
and only left a weak Brigade of Dragoons to strengthen the natural
inaccessibility of their right. It had never occurred to them as a
physical possibility that the Germans, unperceived by their Cossack
scouts, could positively work two Cavalry Divisions round to their rear;
but the Germans had done so, and, riding down the Dragoon Brigade in
question, it rushed with a ringing cheer like a whirlwind upon the
Russian battalions and smote them hip and thigh.

Becoming aware, though all too late, of this impending avalanche of
squadrons in their rear, the Russians had faced about with wonderful
alacrity and steadiness, and delivered a well-directed volley against
their assailants, emptying a very considerable number of saddles; but
though this staggered them a little, it did not in the least stop the
long audacious wave of horsemen, who, couching their lances (for the
German cavalry of all kinds are now armed with this weapon), rode full
tilt at the lines of Russian marksmen, stabbing and spearing them as
they so stubbornly stood their ground. The shock and _mêlée_ were all
over in less time than it takes to tell of it, and having thus performed
their dare-devil and death-dealing ride through the shattered ranks of
Gourko’s infantry, the gallant squadrons put spurs to their jaded
steeds, and with another rousing cheer came galloping across to our
lines, through which they passed amid ringing salvoes of cheers,
retiring into the hollow ground beyond to rally and re-form—though very
much thinned in numbers, it must be admitted. It was an heroic feat,
executed at a great cost of life and limb; but it had completed the
demoralisation among the ranks of the Russian infantry which our
invisible musketry fire had begun, and paved the way for the crowning
manœuvre of the day.

This was performed by our reserve Division of Infantry (the 8th), which,
imitating the strategy of the Prussian Guards at Chlum, had edged its
way round and taken the Russians full on their right flank, which it was
now rapidly rolling up and forcing in upon the centre in huddled masses
of demoralised and defeated troops of all arms. At the same time it was
clear, from certain signs on the extreme right, that our army of the
Vistula had succeeded in performing a similar turning movement in its
particular part of the field (where the bulk of the Russian Cavalry had
bravely, but vainly, attempted to stem the tide of our advance); and by
two o’clock in the afternoon our line of battle had assumed something
like semi-circular shape, which was ever narrowing down upon our
out-manœuvred opponents.

By this time a general advance on our side had been ordered, and our
Corps Artillery, after raining another most awful torrent of shells on
the Russian position, now slackened and gradually stopped its fire, in
order to let our infantry do the rest of the bloody work unhampered by
the fire of their own guns. Our infantry, indeed, were only too eager to
finish its terrible task; and although whole ranks were mown down before
it could succeed in ousting the enemy from the field entrenchments,
which ran bastion-like all round their position in Skierniwiçe, still
Teutonic courage and discipline proved more than equal to Russian
doggedness, and volley after volley of the Mauser repeater soon filled
Gourko’s trenches with heaps of dead and wounded.

[Illustration:

  THE STORMING OF SKIERNIWIÇE.
]

The townlet of Skierniwiçe was in flames, and no longer afforded shelter
to its defenders; the chateau itself (with all its three-Emperor
memories) had been converted into a heap of smoking ruins; the Russian
batteries had been reduced to silence as much by our long-range
rifle-fire as by our own field guns; the wood had also been rendered
untenable by our encompassing it on three sides; and so nothing remained
to be done but storm the position at the point of the bayonet. It is
marvellous how troops can so dispose themselves as to escape observation
in a terrain not over rich in natural and artificial cover; for the
general advance had not been sounded long before reserve companies and
battalions seemed to start from out the very earth and join in the
universal rush forward upon the Russians, as they began to waver and
finally give way all along the line. By one battalion a determined stand
was made at the railway station, where there was some desperate
hand-to-hand fighting that recalled the butchery of Bazeilles; but here,
too, German obstinacy and valour carried the day; and as the ‘Old
Dessauers’ had distinguished themselves by the capture of the Russian
battery at Vlokavek, so now it was reserved to the 2d battalion of that
same regiment to storm, with colours flying and kettle-drums beating,
the final foothold of Gourko’s gallant Muscovites on the field which had
been selected by him and his fellow-commander as the Waterloo of this
portion of the war.

By three o’clock the Russians were in full retreat on Warsaw and its
ring of formidable forts, leaving us in undisputed possession of
Skierniwiçe with all its stores and strategical advantages.

It will be impossible to estimate our own losses as well as those of our
foes for some hours yet; but on both sides the carnage has been fearful,
very much heavier, indeed, in view of the relative numbers of troops
engaged, than were ever suffered by any combatants in the Franco-German
or Russo-Turkish wars. But it is some little consolation, at least, to
think that the ambulance arrangements of the Germans have kept pace with
the improved methods of mass-murder called modern warfare, and the
crowds of wounded, both Germans and Russians, are being well attended
to.

The meeting between our victorious commanders, the King of Saxony and
his brother, Prince George, after the battle, was of a most touching and
affectionate kind, recalling the historic scene at Königgrätz, in which
King William and his heroic son, ‘Unser Fritz,’ were the chief figures.


                 GREAT BATTLE ON THE GALICIAN FRONTIER.

                                                                  LATER.

Just before sending off this despatch news reaches me of a decisive
battle which has also been fought on the Galician frontier between the
combined Russian forces thereabouts and an Austrian army 250,000 strong,
which is said to have resulted in the complete repulse of Dragomiroff,
who is retreating towards Lublin, on the Warsaw line. Should this rumour
prove true, it is probable that Dragomiroff will also retire on Warsaw
to join hands with Gourko and the Grand Duke Vladimir, in which case it
is not unlikely that the present war will be productive of another
Gravelotte and another Metz.




     ITALY MOBILISES HER ARMY, AND TAKES THE FIELD AGAINST FRANCE.

 SCENE IN ROME ON THE DECLARATION OF WAR BY FRANCE—‘ITALY WILL FULFIL HER
                           TREATY OBLIGATIONS.’


              (_By Post from an Occasional Correspondent._)

                                                  MONTE CARLO, _May 30_.

The telegraph will have already kept you well informed of the various
details in the development of the Franco-Italian portion of the present
great European war; but having been enabled, by a series of lucky
chances, to follow the main incidents of the Italian uprising until now,
perhaps you might care to receive from me, by way of supplement to what
you have already published, a brief general record of my observations.

I happened to be in Rome when the telegram was received there announcing
that France had drawn her sword on Germany. I was first made aware of
the fact by a large tumultuous crowd, which came surging and shouting
past my window (a back one) of the Hôtel de Londres, on the Piazza di
Spagna, shouting out ‘_evvivas_’ for Germany and the Triple Alliance.
This crowd had come rolling down from the Pincio, where the splendid
band of the Carabinieri—second to none in Europe—had been discoursing
delightful music, and where a special edition of the _Popolo Romano_ had
disseminated the news, which was not, indeed, wholly unexpected, that
France, profiting by the embarrassments of Germany on her Eastern
frontier, had risen with a cry of vengeance to spring upon the Rhine.
One man had jumped up on the bandstand of the Carabinieri and read out
this telegram to the listening throng, which then, as if by pre-concert,
burst out into ringing cheers for King Humbert and the German Emperor;
while the band swelled the chorus of these enthusiastic acclamations by
playing the Italian Air and the ‘_Wacht am Rhein_.’

Then, starting off for the Quirinal, the crowd came rolling down by the
Church of La Trinità dei Monti, and through the Via Sistina, where I
hastened to join it, and where it stopped before the house in which
Signor Crispi modestly occupies a third-floor flat. In compliance with
the clamours of the mob, the ex-premier, the advocate and author of
Italy’s share in the Triple Alliance, presented himself on his balcony,
and bowed his acknowledgments to the cheering mass below; but, declining
in the circumstances to make a speech, he only waved his hand, and
pointed in the direction of the Quirinal, to which, accordingly, the
multitude now again headed with tumultuous haste.

After rushing up the flight of steps leading to the Quirinal, we found
the spacious area in front of the Royal Palace already filled with
similar contingents of the populace from other parts of the city; some
of the demonstrationists having even clambered up and taken their stand
on the pedestals of the equine masterpieces of Phidias, familiar to all
visitors to Rome, while a very considerable element in the vast
assemblage was formed by the black-robed and tonsured gentlemen from the
other side of the river, who had come to witness the birth of events
which might be pregnant with consequences for them and their
aspirations. And from these priestly figures, with their pale and
pensive faces, I could not help letting my eye wander across the
intervening valley to the lofty windows of the Vatican, where perchance
the self-imprisoned successor of St. Peter was trying, with the aid even
of a telescope, to make out the meaning of all this popular commotion in
front of the palace of the royal inheritor of all his worldly glory—to
make out the meaning of it all, and wonder whether the stirring events
now being fashioned in the crucible of war might possibly result in
restoring to him some shreds and patches of his temporal power.

But these reveries of mine were speedily dispelled by another roar of
acclamation from the multitude, which had parted and formed a lane, as
did the waters of the Red Sea at the sight of Moses and his mantle, to
let some one pass out from the Royal Palace. It was the Marquis di
Rudini, accompanied by two of his secretaries, who had just left the
Council presided over by the King, and was crossing over to the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. Cheer after cheer greeted this appearance of the man
who, although he had stepped into the ministerial shoes of Signor
Crispi, was known to have espoused his popular foreign policy; and the
crowd could scarcely be prevented from shouldering him high and bearing
him into his official residence. The crowd had barely closed round the
portal of the Ministry when it had again to open up a lane to admit the
passage of a carriage containing the German Ambassador, Count Solms, who
had hastened hither from his palace on the Capitoline with a very grave
face indeed. But when he re-emerged from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
in about twenty minutes’ time, the clouds had lifted from his refined
countenance, and he returned the salutations of the crowd with a grave
smile of satisfaction. Quick to draw its own conclusions, the multitude
set up another shout, and began to clamour for Rudini. Yielding at last
to the loud and continuous solicitations of the Roman populace, the
Marquis stepped out upon the balcony of the Ministry, and, after
signifying his wish for silence, addressed his hearers to the following
effect:—

‘Gentlemen, this is at once a serious and a sublime moment, but as it is
a time more for action than for words, my remarks must be brief. France,
as you know, has drawn the sword on Germany, and Italy must be true to
her loyal ally. (A burst of cheering.)

‘Italy entered into certain treaty obligations, which she is now
required to fulfil; and Italy will now fulfil them. (Frantic cheers.)

‘The die is cast, and we must redeem our pledges at all risks; for our
honour is at stake, and our national existence would be nothing without
our national honour. (Loud “_evvivas_.”)

‘This is the first time that Italy, as a united nation, has been called
upon to show the stuff whereof she is made; and with God’s help she will
justify the love that has been lavished, as well as the hopes that have
been placed upon her.

‘I need only add that orders have been issued for the immediate
mobilising of all our brave army; and that the steps of this army will
be accompanied by the fervent prayer of every true Italian—and we are
all true Italians—from the sunny plains of Sicily to the snow-clad peaks
of the Alps. (Great cheering.)

‘Italia farà da se. Evviva il Re Humberto! Evviva l’imperatore di
Germania! Evviva la tripla Allianza!’

Loud and long-continued cheering followed this speech of the Marquis
Rudini (which was presently again to serve as the substance of a more
elaborate oration in the Chamber); but with his exit from the balcony of
the Foreign Office I may fitly drop my curtain on this opening scene of
the Italian War-drama, which your space will only allow me to portray in
one or two representative sketches, but not describe in detail.




                           THE COUNCIL OF WAR


The scene of the next incident which I have to record was the Ministry
of War, one of the hugest buildings in Rome (for in every country of the
Continent is not the architecture of war rapidly dwarfing the structures
of religion?), where King Humbert presided over a Council composed of
his military and naval magnates, including the Generals commanding the
twelve Army Corps of the monarchy, and the Admirals of the Fleet, who
had been summoned by telegraph to the capital to advise as to the course
of action which should be adopted against France. The General Staff, it
is true, had already worked out a plan of campaign for the contingency
of such a war; but the situation, as it now stood, presented elements of
doubt and difficulty which had not been wholly foreseen, and it was
therefore necessary to deliberate as to how the Italian army should be
divided and disposed of in existing circumstances.

The main question was: how many Army Corps could be hurled against
France? and this question again was subordinate to the consideration of
how many would be required to guard the coasts of Italy against a French
descent. Moreover, the fact underlying both these questions, as pointed
out by the King, was the absence of any hope that England would, for the
present at least, see her way to give the aims of the Triple Alliance
more than her mere moral support. Had England, for a due consideration,
formally joined the Alliance, and placed her fleet at the disposal of
Italy, thus securing her against all danger of French aggression, or
counter-strokes, by sea, the whole Italian army would have been free to
operate in the field against France; but, as it was, Italy had to face
the possibility of a descent at various parts of her open and extensive
sea-board by a French force of at least four Army Corps. France had
already sent thirteen of her twenty Corps towards the Rhine; but the
seven other garrisoning her Southern and South-western Departments had
not yet received their marching orders; and at any moment some of them
might be poured down to Marseilles and Toulon within a few hours’
sailing of the Italian coast.

The opinion of the War Council was very much divided as to what should
be done, Generals Pianell and Bariola acting as spokesmen of the two
divergent parties; but at length, on the motion of General Cosenz, Chief
of the Staff, whose view was supported by the King, it was resolved in
the meantime to intrust the task of falling on the flank of France to
the 1st, 2d, 3d and 4th Corps, while the 6th and 7th would act as a
reserve, and the others remain behind to adapt themselves to the
development of events, especially if the French were to suffer reverses
on the Rhine and be thus compelled to denude the Southern Departments of
their garrisons.

And then as to the line of attack, the line, that is to say, by which
the Italians should seek to enter France, the Council—but here my
informant, who was present, begged me to exercise the patience which I
would now similarly seek to enjoin upon your readers. I may add that by
the time the Council had finished its deliberations, the Marquis Rudini
had sent to the evening papers the text of the German-Italian Treaty of
Alliance, of which the terms are analogous to the Austro-German one
published by Prince Bismarck a few years ago, stipulating for a mutual
guarantee of territorial integrity, and providing that, in the event of
either Germany or Italy being attacked by France, the other Power should
at once take the field in its defence.




                   ITALIAN ROUTE—THROUGH THE RIVIERA.


From Rome I went to Spezzia, where a friend had promised to take me on
board his yacht; and here I found a formidable ironclad squadron,
consisting of the _Italia_, the _Andrea Doria_, the _Francisco
Morosimi_, the _Re Umberto_, the _Rugiero di Lauria_, the _Affondatore_
(turret-ram), and several other vessels of the second class, preparing
to put to sea. What could be the objective of this fleet? On this point
all the naval authorities were as silent as the grave; but a few more
days were to solve the mystery.

Our own destination was Monte Carlo, where we anchored our yacht in the
pretty little bay of Monaco, and, going ashore, found the army of the
Prince—consisting of about sixty-five carabineers—in no small state of
excitement, owing to the prospect of its being forced perhaps by
circumstances to abandon its attitude of armed neutrality, and sucked
into the whirlpool of hostilities, whereof the Riviera might so soon
become the sanguinary scene. But such a prospect had not the least
apparent terror for the visitors to the beautiful Inferno at Monte
Carlo—men and women of all nations—Jews and Gentiles, Elamites and
Assyrians—who, in spite of the military bustle going on around
them—French battalions of Chasseurs and Alpine troops arriving and
departing by road and rail—continued to frequent the tables of the
Casino with an all-engrossing passion for their occupation worthy of the
abstruse philosopher of Syracuse. ‘_Noli turbare circulos meos_,’ also
exclaimed these lost-to-all-else worshippers of the roulette wheels.

It is not, perhaps, generally known in England, but the fact is that
during the last few years the French have been busy constructing a
formidable line of forts all along the Riviera from Marseilles to
Mentone; and every commanding peak and mountain-top overlooking the sea
and the seaside road is capped with one of these terrifically strong
stone-works. Careless pleasure-seekers on the Riviera are not likely to
take special notice of these mountain-crowns, with heavy long-range guns
for their jewels; but there they are, all the same. They form, indeed,
France’s silent answer to the Triple Alliance, and were placed there
since the conclusion of that pact to bar the advance of Italy, should
that Power, in fulfilment of her treaty engagements with Germany, be
called upon to assail the flank of France, and select as her line of
attack the sea-board rather than the mountain route.

[Illustration:

  ITALIAN ARTILLERY CROSSING THE MONT CENIS.
]

An important reason why the Italian army should prefer the Riviera road
into France with all its perils was that, apart from the natural
difficulties of the Alpine routes, which had rather increased than
diminished since the time of Hannibal and Cæsar, they were
unwilling—such was their loyalty to public law—to expose themselves to
the charge of infringing the neutrality either of Switzerland or of
Savoy. For it must be remembered that, even after it had changed hands
with Nice in 1860, Savoy, this section, so to speak, of the
Franco-Italian Alsace-Lorraine, continued subject to the Treaty of
Vienna (1815) as neutral territory, part of which, Chablais and
Faucigny, might even be occupied with Federal troops ‘in the event of
Switzerland’s neighbours being in a state of open or imminent warfare.’
Indeed, a portion of the Federal Army had already made bold to brave the
displeasure and even the reprisals of France by occupying as it was,
theoretically speaking, entitled to do, the upper part of Savoy; and
this had introduced into the military situation an element of complexity
which the Italians would have been foolish to ignore. Consequently, they
resolved to force the passage of the Riviera road—the more so as their
fleet could cover their march to some extent, and even land troops at
particular points, as long at least, at the other portions of the French
navy, at present engaged in the Baltic and elsewhere, should not be free
to make for the Mediterranean.

The Italians had also resolved to send another smaller army, consisting
of their 1st and 3d Corps (whose places in the army of the Riviera were
to be taken by the 6th and 8th), across the Alps by the Mont Cenis
route, so as thus to attempt to turn the flank of the French Army,
consisting mainly of the 7th, 14th, 15th, and 16th Corps, which were now
pretty well all the French could spare from the further draft they had
had to make on their military resources with a view to repair their
reverses on the Rhine.




                         BATTLE OF COSTEBELLE.

                           MOUNTAIN WARFARE.


I need not describe to you in detail, for that has doubtless already
been done for you, the incidents of the preliminary fighting between the
two armies—French and Italian—since the first outpost collision at
Ventimiglia, and the first serious collision near Mentone. You are sure
to have heard of all the thrilling incidents forming the prelude to the
drama—the splendid but unavailing defence that was made by the 24th
Battalion of French Chasseurs from Ville-Franche against the
irresistible onslaught of the Bersaglieri of the 4th Italian Corps; the
brilliant cavalry encounter between the 5th Italian Lancers and the
French Dragoons of Tarascon (Tartarin’s native place on the Rhone); the
exploits of the Italian Alpini, or Alpine Sharpshooters, in scouting and
hill-climbing that would put to shame the records of the Alpine Club;
the wonders of marching and ‘milling’ (if I may use a slang word) done
by the mule-borne mountain-batteries of either belligerent: the
obstinate artillery duels between the Italian ironclads which steam
along the coast and the bastioned stone-work batteries that crown the
mountain-tops; with all the other novel features in this almost
fascinating picture of bloody war set in such a beautiful framework of
blue sky and purple hills, o’erlooking a paradise of flowers.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Battle of Hyères, or rather of Costebelle (where Queen Victoria
lately passed a few quiet and peaceful weeks), though it resulted in the
repulse of the French, and their retirement on Toulon, is not quite
decisive of the campaign, as it will be next to impossible for the
Italians to possess themselves of this formidable and important place,
even with the aid of their fleet, before getting reinforcements from
Italy, which cannot for the present be spared; and meanwhile the Brest
Squadron of the French Fleet may be able to get rid of its
embarrassments elsewhere and come round to the Mediterranean.

The situation, no doubt, will be simplified if General Ricotti, with his
two Corps, manages to debouch from the Alps on the Mont Cenis side, and,
disposing of all opposition in that quarter, come down the valley of the
Rhone to co-operate with the army of the Riviera. But, in the meantime,
the issue of the whole war may have been decided on the Vistula and the
Rhine; and, if so, then the Italians will have accomplished their chief
aim, which was to distract and hamper the forces of France, by creating
a diversion on her flank and rear, and thus render her defeat by the
Germans all the easier and all the more certain.

In any case, the victories already achieved by the Italians show them to
be possessed of splendid soldierly material, both in men and
officers—material in no single respect inferior to that of France; and
when, after the late battle of Costebelle, the German Emperor
telegraphed to King Humbert that ‘his troops had done things of which
their Prussian comrades themselves might very well be proud, and which
at least they had never surpassed even at Rossbach and Sedan,’ it must
have been felt by all the world that His German Majesty, in employing
the phrases of compliment, was only using the language of truth.


                 _To the Editor of ‘Black and White.’_

SIR,—I observe that some confusion has arisen as to the authorship of
the letters from the Baltic and North Sea relating to the terrible war
now raging. They are not mine. The author is my friend, Sir Rambleton
Seaforth, who was on his wedding trip, and has certainly had a
remarkable experience in that way. He is only a yachtsman, not a naval
man, or he would have no doubt been able to give us fuller details, and
a more correct view of the situation. The letters were written to me,
and not intended for publication, and I much fear I shall be hauled over
the coals when he comes home. But I shall answer him with the truth,
which was that his sister stole them off my desk and sent them to you
without asking my leave.

I am sorry to say that the pair did not come to the end of their
adventures in the _Thames_. On her way into Sheerness she was ordered by
signal to transfer her despatches into a picket-boat, which was sent out
to her, and to proceed at once to Plymouth. As Sir Rambleton’s place is
in Devonshire, he and his wife decided to go on in her. Unfortunately,
when she made her number off the Start, she was signalled to proceed at
once off Cape Finisterre for the protection of commerce, and to coal at
Ferrol, but not to call there till actually short of coal. She asked
leave to land her passengers, and was refused, so Sir Rambleton and his
wife are at sea off Finisterre now, if they have not been captured and
carried into a French port, as it was stated that quite a cloud of
French cruisers had been ordered to rendezvous at that point.—I am, Sir,
your obedient servant,

                                                           P. H. COLOMB.

 _May 10, 189—._




                       THE LANDING AT TREBIZONDE.

     LORD SALISBURY ON THE SITUATION—DEBATE IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS.


                                             LONDON, _Saturday, May 14_.

It was not till May 7th that our Correspondent’s letter (_see page 102_)
announcing the reported arrival of English troops in Trebizonde was
published in London. It had been delayed in transmission. Meantime, on
May 3d, the day following the debate in the House of Commons, the
proclamation calling out the Reserves was posted throughout the kingdom.
It appears that warning notices, issued as secretly as possible, had
been sent out four days earlier, following the precedent set in 1882. On
May 6th Mr. Balfour gave notice that he should on May 10th ask for a
credit vote in the House of Commons for ten millions, and for authority
to call out the Militia. On the reception of the news received from our
Correspondent, however, a hasty conference of the Liberal leaders, which
met at Mr. Gladstone’s house, decided that, as it would be inconvenient
to have a debate in the House of Commons prior to that on the credit
vote on May 10th, Lord Kimberley should on Monday night, May 9th, ask
for explanations of Lord Salisbury, and notice was at once sent to Lord
Salisbury to that effect. On the afternoon of May 9th the House of Lords
was crowded from floor to ceiling. All the Princes were in their places.
The House of Commons occupied the whole of the space at the bar in a
dense mass. The galleries were filled with the Princesses and Peeresses.

Amid breathless silence, Lord Kimberley rose. In a few cautiously worded
sentences he expressed a hope that Lord Salisbury would be able to give
an unqualified contradiction to the ridiculous rumour which had reached
England. He referred, of course, to the report of a correspondent that
as long ago as April 29th, English troops, the forerunners of an English
expedition, either had landed, or were immediately about to land, at
Trebizonde. The House was ready to support the Ministry in every measure
which they might take to safeguard the honour and interests of England.
No part of the House was more zealous in that respect than those noble
Lords with whom he had the honour to be associated. But a landing at
Trebizonde implied something which in no way concerned the honour and
interests of England. It was impossible that their Lordships should not
be led by it to suppose that the noble Marquis, the head of the
Government, considered himself bound by that ridiculous compact, the
Cyprus Convention, and that he now felt himself called upon to draw the
sword of England in defence of Turkey, because Russia had crossed the
Asiatic frontier of Turkey. However few the Liberal Peers in that House
might be, they felt that they expressed the mind of England in declaring
to the noble Marquis that, in behalf of the corrupt Government of
Turkey, the sword of England ought never again to be drawn. As for the
Cyprus Convention, it had been abrogated by Turkey herself. It was
conditional, and the conditions had not been fulfilled. Speaking with
the authority of many able military men, he could assure the noble
Marquis that if he contemplated a campaign amid the mountains of Asia
Minor, a campaign which, even if successful, could only lead up to a
long and dreary siege of the Russian fortress of Kars, he was involving
the country in military difficulties of untold magnitude and limitless
duration. He was doing this at a time when, amid a universal
conflagration, we required all our forces for the complications which
were sure to arise both in Europe and in Asia.

[Illustration:

  LORD SALISBURY ADDRESSING THE HOUSE OF LORDS ON THE QUESTION OF PEACE
    AND WAR.
]

There was rather a buzz of excitement than any definite applause when
the noble Lord sat down. It was promptly hushed, as Lord Salisbury
immediately rose to reply. He spoke as follows:—

‘My Lords, I do not require the assurance of the noble Earl that your
House is ready to support Her Majesty’s Government in any steps which
may be indispensable to safeguard the honour and interests of England. I
cannot discuss with that freedom which the noble Earl, naturally as an
independent Peer, allows himself, the character of the Government of our
ally, the Sultan of Turkey, or the present position of the Cyprus
Convention. Happily for the explanation which I am glad to have this
opportunity of offering to your Lordships, it is wholly unnecessary for
me to refer to either. We have never professed ourselves ready to
support the Government of the Sultan against his Christian subjects,
should that contingency arise. But there is one thing on which I think
it is well that Europe should understand, that not only this House, but
the whole of England, is agreed. We do not desire to see the independent
Balkan States crushed beneath the heel of Russia. We do not desire to
see the population of Asia Minor pass from the Government of the Turk to
that of the Czar. I am unwilling to say all that I easily might say on
that subject at the present moment. War between us and Russia has not
been declared. Our relations are in so delicate a condition that I
should have asked the noble Earl to postpone his question, but that I
feared that might give rise to misunderstanding. We live in hope that
such a dire calamity as a war between us and Russia may yet be averted
by the wisdom and the notoriously peaceful disposition of the Czar. But
the situation is this. Russia has commenced by sea an attack upon
Bulgaria. In order to say nothing that may tend to aggravate the
difficulties of the present moment, I refrain from referring to the
circumstances which preceded that invasion. In any case, it has been
impossible for us to allow Bulgaria to be crushed when the support of
our fleet would be of the most material importance to her. We, on
hearing of the Russian invasion, at once issued orders to Sir George
Tryon to act under the instructions of our ambassador at Constantinople.
With the consent of the Sultan, the fleet under Sir George Tryon entered
the Black Sea five days after the Russians had effected their landing in
Bulgaria. We then intimated to the Czar that we could not allow any
further reinforcements to be carried to Varna, and we heard yesterday
that the Russian fleet, yielding to the superior force of ours, had
retreated to the harbour of Sebastopol. The roadstead of Varna is in
occupation of our cruisers. The Russians have advanced inland, leaving a
force to cover the siege of Varna, which is held by about 5000
Bulgarians. It was in consequence of the Turks having announced their
intention of supporting their vassal State, Bulgaria, that the Russian
troops, without any declaration of war, crossed the frontiers in Asia
Minor. As it had been at our instance that Turkey had agreed to give
support to the Bulgarians, it was impossible that we could leave her
without a pledge of our support when this aggression took place. It is
not a political question of the future destinies of Asia Minor as
between Turkey and the Armenian population. It is simply a question of
giving military support to a valuable ally during actual warfare. We
cannot afford to throw away the assistance of thousands of most valiant
soldiers, who are ready to support our just demand that the Balkan
States shall be allowed to pursue in tranquillity that orderly
development which has excited the astonishment and the admiration of
Europe.

‘As to the military dangers which the noble Earl apprehends, I think
that it would be highly inconvenient, at a time when it is at least
possible that actual war may follow, that we should discuss, for the
information of those against whom we may have to fight, our military
projects. It will, I think, be sufficient for me to say that we have
intrusted the conduct of the whole of these operations to a member of
your Lordships’ House, in whom we have complete confidence, and whose
name will be a guarantee to the country that nothing will be wanting in
the command of the war, should it unfortunately be forced upon us, which
will tend to the honour and success of the British arms. The gallant
Viscount, the present Commander-in-Chief in Ireland, whom I am glad to
see in his place to-night, will, I have no doubt, be quite prepared to
accept responsibility for any dangers which trouble the imagination of
the noble Earl. But I should suppose that he will prefer to discuss his
plans with him after rather than before the war. It is not in presence
of armies which, as we have recently seen, are conducted with absolute
secrecy, and are able to deliver unexpected blows, because no one knows
what is going to happen till the stroke falls, that we can afford to
discuss our arrangements in the face of the world. The gallant Viscount
has at least fully satisfied Her Majesty’s Government that he has a
complete grasp of the whole situation, that he knows his own mind, and
we accept full responsibility for all that he proposes to do. If you do
not trust us, replace us by those whom you do trust. But, in Heaven’s
name, let me implore you not to allow the strength of England at this
moment to be weakened by divided counsels or by want of confidence in
those to whom the conduct of military affairs is intrusted. At this
moment it may make the whole difference between our obtaining by
peaceful means the acceptance of our just demands and a war which must
be terrible and may be long. In any case, should war break out, the firm
attitude of the whole country, its patriotic resolve and a temporary
abstinence from feeble criticism will have a most decisive effect upon
the future.’

When Lord Salisbury sat down there was a momentary and most impressive
hush, as of awed silence, in presence of the tremendous events which
appeared to be imminent, and then there came from all parts of the House
a burst of general and enthusiastic cheering, all the more striking
because of the usually impassive attitude of that august assembly. The
ladies in the gallery for a moment rose altogether as by a single
impulse, and when they sat down not a few of them burst into tears from
excitement, while a buzz of eager talk filled both House and galleries.

When the excitement had a little quieted down, Lord Rosebery, in a few
short sentences, expressed his entire sympathy with the general policy
enunciated by Lord Salisbury. He could not, however, refrain from hoping
that we were not about to be committed to a dangerous and difficult
campaign in Asia Minor, where the roads were bad, the country difficult,
and the end uncertain. He had, however, complete confidence in the
prudence and military genius of the gallant Viscount, and had no wish to
hamper either him or the Government with untimely criticism.

The general effect throughout the country of the debate in the House of
Lords decided the Liberal leaders to allow Mr. Balfour’s application for
the credit vote to pass unchallenged. Mr. Labouchere, however, moved the
rejection of the vote, and was seconded by Sir Wilfrid Lawson. The
credit was voted by a majority of 412 to 17. We do not propose to
trouble our readers with the details of the debate. No one took Mr.
Labouchere very seriously, and Sir Wilfrid Lawson’s jokes, which by no
means suited the temper of the House, may be found scattered through his
previous speeches. With the exception of two or three peace-at-any-price
members, nearly the whole of those who followed Mr. Labouchere consisted
of Parnellite members, who avowedly voted only in order to show their
independence of Mr. M‘Carthy and of both political parties. The funniest
incident occurred when Sir Wilfrid Lawson, whose own position was an
absolutely isolated one, repeated his old proposals to boycott the army.
The humour of the situation took the fancy of the House, and a general
titter gradually broke into a roar of laughter as the honourable member,
either not appreciating the point, or wilfully blind, exclaimed, ‘Well,
I shall!’ It was the only opportunity which members had for relieving
pent-up feeling, and they indulged it freely.




                 MOBILISATION OF THE FIRST ARMY CORPS.

                        CALLING OUT THE RESERVE.


Meantime the mobilisation of that portion of the 1st Army Corps, which
was not moved with Sir Evelyn Wood to Antwerp, proceeded. It is
necessary to explain what was and was not done in the case of the
regiments that went to Antwerp. The troops at Aldershot were gradually
increased, with a view nominally to the summer drills, till they
numbered something under 12,000 men. To these, for the purposes of the
expedition, were added three battalions of the Guards from London, two
of the regiments of Household Cavalry, and two batteries of Field
Artillery from Woolwich.

[Illustration:

  THE MOBILISATION OF THE ENGLISH ARMY—TROOPS MARCHING THROUGH THE DOCK
    GATES, PORTSMOUTH.
]

It must, however, be understood that in the proper sense of the term
these regiments could not be ‘mobilised.’ _There is at this moment no
battalion in the whole kingdom, except those of the Guards, that is fit
to go on active service as it stands on parade._ The battalions are
filled with recruits who, when mobilisation is ordered, have, in the
first instance, to be replaced with men from the Reserve. This cannot be
done without a proclamation, and without the fact of the Reserves being
called out being known to everybody. For such a sudden movement as Mr.
Balfour announced in the House of Commons on May 2d, there are no troops
but the Guards ordinarily available; but when application was made to
the military authorities to know how soon it would be possible to carry
out a move of this kind, it was pointed out, in the first instance, that
the occupation of a fortress like Antwerp is a very different thing from
a campaign in the field. It would do no harm to the young troops to be
moved across sea to Belgium. There they would be comfortably housed, and
when mobilisation was ordered it would be easy to send over to that
quarter the Reserve men to take their place in the ranks. Indeed, it was
pointed out that this course would be positively advantageous. For
supposing that Sir Evelyn Wood’s troops were required for a campaign
elsewhere, it would be best to replace them in Antwerp by forming depôts
there of recruits who with, perhaps, a few Militia regiments, who might
be induced to volunteer for the purpose, would form a sufficient
garrison; since it was in the last degree unlikely that, with all they
had on their hands, any of the armies in the field would attempt a siege
of such a fortress as Antwerp, occupied by English troops, even though
young and raw. As soon as the probability of the Eastern expedition
arose, we believe that Lord Wolseley pointed out that it was
indispensable to carry out this plan. As the Reserves for the battalions
now at Antwerp came in at the home stations they were shipped over to
that town, and in fact all arrived there about the 9th of this month.

Sir Thomas Baker has, we understand, been sent over to Antwerp to take
command of that garrison as soon as the depôts can be formed. Thus,
about the time that we write, the whole of Sir Evelyn Wood’s force ready
to take the field will be available for service elsewhere. From the
all-important point of view of facilities for embarkation and provision
of shipping, this has been a decided gain. Enormous as are the
mercantile resources of England, and patriotic as has been the readiness
of all our great companies to place their vessels at the disposal of
Government, it has always been assumed that we could not reasonably
calculate on moving off from our ports at one moment more than about
35,000 troops, or the force of one _corps d’armée_. To move such a
force, with all the carriages, horses, and stores necessary to make the
army available for the field, will require 135 large steamers. Warning
and provisional arrangements had, we understand, been made, for as many
as this, by the transport department of the Admiralty, when the
Government first began to apprehend the possibility of our having to
employ them, nearly a month ago. But the facilities of the Port of
Antwerp have enormously increased our means of transport. By far the
larger portion of the shipping of that great port is in the hands of
English firms, and the commercial relations between these firms and
Germany have enabled the Government to charter, in addition to a large
mass of Antwerp shipping, many German ships which have been laid up by
the high war rates now ruling for insurance. Thus, virtually without
touching our own shipping or the facilities for embarking at our ports,
Sir Evelyn Wood’s troops, forming about half of the 2d Corps which he is
destined to command at the Seat of War, will be embarked probably before
these words see the light.

Meantime the troops of the 1st Army Corps have already left our shores.

On May 8th the Duke of Connaught, who is to command the 1st Army Corps,
sailed with the Headquarter Staff of that Corps and the 2d Battalion
Scots Guards from the Royal Albert Docks, North Woolwich, in his old
ship, the _Orient_, which had been recently docked. His Royal Highness
had asked that, if it were equally convenient, he might travel with the
captain and in the ship in which he had sailed for Egypt in 1882. It was
a point of _punctilio_ with the captain to clear out at exactly the same
hour as in 1882; and accordingly, at twelve o’clock on May 8th, amid the
cheers of a vast crowd, the _Orient_ sailed from Woolwich as in 1882,
just five days after the issue of the order calling in the Reserve men.
The other portions of the Corps have sailed within the last week.

So far all speaks well for the efficient working of our system, but from
our different correspondents at the points where mobilisation has been
taking place, we hear of not a few blots which mar the harmony of the
picture.

In the first place, an undoubted and severe strain has been put upon our
resources. It is not usual for more than three battalions of the Guards
to leave England at the same time for active service. The zeal and
patriotism of the London Scottish, the Inns of Court Volunteers, the
20th Middlesex, the Artists’ Corps, induced them to volunteer to take up
several of the day guards in London; special arrangements having been
worked out to make the duties as little irksome as possible, and to
arrange for a free interchange of the men. With the exception of the
Bank Guard, all-night duties have been handed over to the police, and it
is hoped that this arrangement may become a permanent one. Thus
relieved, the single battalion of the Grenadiers left in London will, it
is believed, be sufficient for the indispensable remainder of the day
duties, though we have seen solemn old heads gravely shaken from the
windows of ‘The Rag,’ as they looked across the way at the policeman
who, even for day duty, has assumed the protection of the War Office and
Horse Guards.

Thus, in addition to the brigade of Guards which moved with Sir Evelyn
Wood to Antwerp, a second Guard Brigade has been formed for the corps
which His Royal Highness is to command.

According to the method intended to be the normal one for our
mobilisation, as soon as the 1st Corps has moved off to the ports of
embarkation, their places are to be taken at the stations they have
vacated by the regiments of the 2d Army Corps, who will then be
mobilised, and will subsequently be embarked from the same ports as the
others. This arrangement has been disturbed by the fact that Sir Evelyn
Wood’s troops, forming about a division and a half of the 1st Army
Corps, as originally intended, were prepared for movement in ample time,
it having been known for nearly a year that such a movement might be
required at any moment. When it was subsequently known that it would be
necessary to send two Army Corps to the seat of war, as the troops from
England would necessarily precede those from Antwerp, the places vacated
at Aldershot were taken up by regiments of the proper 2d Army Corps, and
their Reserve men sent to them there.

[Illustration:

  RESERVE MEN SERVED WITH THE NEW MAGAZINE-RIFLE, AND OFF TO THE FRONT
    TO-MORROW.
]

As regards the equipment of Sir Evelyn’s force, there was nothing to
find fault with,—the material for the necessary transport and stores was
actually at Aldershot, and, for the Guards, in London. The troops
embarked complete in every respect, except for the unavoidable absence
of their Reserve men, which has now been supplied. On the whole, the
Reserve men have come in very well, and the deficiency in the calculated
numbers is very slight. The contrast in their age and physique to the
boys of the battalions as we have known them, is very marked. On the
other hand, it is reported that those who have left the colours for some
years show sadly the defects of their not having been called out
regularly for training. Many of them have certainly seen and handled the
magazine-rifle. Others have not even done that. A certain falling off
also in military habits and discipline is perhaps better indicated in a
description which has been given by one of the correspondents of a trip
he took in a railway carriage, with five men going to join their depôt
from certain quarries in the north. We shall abridge his graphic sketch
of the men in order to record the conversation he details.

One of them, a big man with sandy whiskers and indifferently shaved, but
evidently a good-natured fellow, clapped him familiarly on the knee
after certain gifts of baccy and a little nip from his flask, which
latter was, however, refused by two out of the five, had made them all
disposed to be communicative. ‘Look ye here, sir, I doesn’t mind a bit
going back for a little soldiering, but it seems strange like. Why, a
few months ago, one of the officers of my old regiment came down to see
us at the quarries where we was. He was a very nice young officer, had
been adjutant, and if I’d seen him by myself on the road, I’d have liked
nothing better than to touch my hat to him, and get a bit of a chat
about old times. But, lor’ bless yer, if I’d saluted him down in the
quarries I shouldn’t have heard the last of it this side of Christmas.
He seemed rather worried like at the way we treated him, though we was
all glad to see him, and he asked me about it. “Well,” says I, “the
reason the chaps don’t salute you, is just that they darn’t for fear of
the chaff.” “What do yer salute him for? yer needn’t, yer know,” that’s
what all the other men in the quarries would want to know. Well, yer
know, sir, ’tain’t that. It’s a kind of way of saying as you belong to
the same body like as he does. He’s got his dooty and you’ve got yours.
But, lor’ bless you, you never could make the quarry chaps see that.
“See what John Morley says,” they’d say, “he tells yer it’s rank
slavery, and that’s just what it is. You make believe to like it, cos
you’ve lost yer tail and ’ud like to see other chaps lose theirs.” Well,
yer know, sir, when you’ve been five or six years among that sort o’
thing, and all the time you haven’t had the chance of so much as seeing
a regiment, and feel that you don’t know nothing about this here
blooming new drill, and about these yer magazine rifles and smokeless
powder as they talks about, well, it seems strange like. You feel as if
your blood had got changed since you was with the regiment. However,
when we went off with a chance of going away to the war, and even when
the Proclamation was fastened upon the village inn, and the women was
howling fit to split, one old quarryman claps me on the back, and says
he, “I’d like to be going with you, my lad; good luck for old England,”
for their blood got up pretty quick when they heard of the row, and they
like fighting as well as any one.’

[Illustration:

  READING THE MOBILISATION ORDER.
]

We must reserve for next week the reports we have heard from the Militia
and the state of the proper 2d Army Corps, half of which will now become
the 1st Army Corps under the Duke of Connaught, and the other half will,
with Sir Evelyn’s troops, form the 2d Army Corps under him.

At the last moment we hear that the titles of the Corps which Sir Evelyn
and the Duke of Connaught are to command are changed. It has been
naturally assumed that the Duke of Connaught would command the 1st
Corps, and Sir Evelyn the 2d. All the correspondents during the week
have so reported it, and we understand that, as a matter of courtesy,
this would have been arranged if possible. But, as Sir Evelyn’s troops
all belong to the 1st Army Corps in the mobilisation scheme, and the
waggons and stores were all marked for the ‘1st Army Corps,’ it was
found that to have changed this order would have introduced endless
confusion. On the matter being explained to the Prince, he is reported
to have said that ‘he was a soldier, and could only wish that what was
best for the Service should be considered. He was proud to serve as
brother Corps-commander with so distinguished a soldier as Sir Evelyn
Wood.’




                  RUSSIA DECLARES WAR AGAINST ENGLAND.

               SIR GEORGE TRYON EVACUATES THE BLACK SEA.


                                                       LONDON, _May 21_.

Events have ripened fast since last week. Russia, on May 16, on hearing
of the dispatch of our troops to the East, declared war against us. The
excitement against us in France has reached boiling point. There can be
no doubt that our great fleet of convoys would not have been allowed to
leave England had there, at the time of their departure, seemed to be
any prospect of France declaring war against us, because from Algeria
and her southern ports, she so threatens our movement through the
Mediterranean that that opportunity is in itself an additional incentive
to her to declare war. For a long time, however, it appeared as if the
Ministry, prudently anxious not to add further to the enemies France
already has on her hands, would temporise with us. Public feeling will,
however, it is to be feared, prove too strong for the Ministry, and for
some time the gravest anxiety was felt at home as to the fate of the
expedition in the event of the fleet being attacked whilst escorting so
great a convoy of ships, while Sir George Tryon was known to be fully
occupied in the Black Sea. On the 18th, however, a telegraphic message
arrived announcing that Sir George Tryon had withdrawn the entire fleet
from the Black Sea immediately after the retreat of the Russian Fleet to
Sebastopol; that his flag-ship had arrived at Malta, that the Duke of
Connaught, in the _Orient_, had reached Cyprus after a very rapid and
successful voyage; and that all the transports sailing direct from
England had either arrived at or passed Malta. It is understood that the
greater part of the troops of the 1st Army Corps will for the present
rendezvous at Cyprus, where extensive preparations have for a long time
past been made for their reception. Alarm was at first excited in some
quarters lest the troops should suffer as they had done at the time of
the first occupation of Cyprus. But according to the reports from the
island it appears that a great improvement has taken place in its
sanitary condition—thanks to the British occupation; that the chief
cause of the ill-health of the troops at the former time was the want of
proper hutting arrangements, provided for them beforehand. Large
quantities of roofing felt have been sent out, and labourers have
constructed, under the direction of the engineers, large huts admirably
roofed, and now practically ready for about 30,000 men. In case the
necessary huts should not be ready for the whole of the troops, it is
understood that the remainder of the force will land in Egypt. It is
obvious that no expedition can be carried into the Black Sea until the
great Naval action, which will almost certainly follow the French
Declaration of War,—which is expected whilst we write,—has decided which
flag is to be supreme in the Mediterranean.

Meantime, Sir Evelyn Wood’s troops, which sailed from Antwerp on May
13th and 14th, have temporarily put into Gibraltar and Cadiz, where they
have been received in the most friendly manner by our present allies the
Spaniards.

The departure from England of the second half of the 2d Corps has been
postponed. The ships are ready, but it is obviously inadvisable to
accumulate more troops on the long line to the East till the question of
the supremacy of the Alliance in the Mediterranean has been settled. The
detachment of troops which was landed at Trebizonde has necessarily been
withdrawn. They would have been exposed to attack by indefinitely
superior force as soon as the command of the Black Sea passed into the
hands of the Russians. It appears that the detachment never consisted of
more than half a battalion, and a few sappers from the garrison of
Cyprus, which had been reinforced with a view to such a movement.




                     DECLARATION OF WAR IN LONDON.

               MOVEMENT BY THE CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY.


London has had the excitement of a pageant unseen since 1854, and
therefore unknown to most of our generation. On May 18th the
Sergeant-at-Arms, attended by the whole of the city functionaries,
declared war against Russia from the steps of the Royal Exchange.

[Illustration:

  DECLARATION OF WAR AGAINST RUSSIA FROM THE STEPS OF THE ROYAL
    EXCHANGE.
]

It is obvious that we may have before long to expect some aggression of
Russia upon Afghanistan. But Russia has already involved herself in such
a number of campaigns, against Germany, against Austria, against
Bulgaria and Turkey, and also against Turkey in Asia, that it seems in
the last degree improbable that, with her resources impoverished and
weakened by the effects of the great famine, she can employ great force
in Afghanistan also. On our part, however, it is indispensable that we
should in India not expect to carry on a great aggressive campaign
against Russia. For, whereas for a forward campaign large
reinforcements, both of men and officers, would be required, we cannot
at present afford to send any large number of men from home, and even
the possible supply of officers will be very limited.

We understand, however, that arrangements have been made with the
Canadian Pacific Railway for the immediate dispatch to India by that
line of about 200 retired officers who have volunteered their services,
and who having large Indian experience will be invaluable for many of
the appointments that will become indispensable. One of our ablest and
best known artists has made arrangements to accompany this party. We
hope in a future issue to give a number of graphic illustrations of the
new route, which, now that the Suez Canal is no longer available, from
the risks attending it, fully shows its importance to the safety of the
Empire. We understand that, also by the Canadian Pacific line, enormous
stores of magazine rifles were, none too soon, dispatched to India about
a month ago. Furthermore, about 500 million cartridges of smokeless
powder for the rifles were dispatched about a fortnight ago by the same
route. It was found impossible to obtain these from the Government
factories, which up to the eve of the war were still experimenting on
the form of powder. The ‘Smokeless Powder Company,’ however, undertook
to provide 1000 million cartridges as a first instalment. Five hundred
million of them have been assigned as the first provision for home and
the Eastern expedition, and the second instalment was sent off in hot
haste to the East, _viâ_ the West, special arrangements for its security
having been undertaken by the Canadian Pacific.


                   MOBILISATION OF THE SECOND CORPS.

Meantime it is certainly not to be regretted that we have been compelled
to delay the dispatch from England of the second half of the 2d Corps.
The trooping season to India being now over, nearly all the drafts had
been sent out before the risk of war appeared imminent. A certain number
were, however, kept back towards the end of the season. Nevertheless,
the Reserve men have barely sufficed to make up the Corps and a half
which have already sailed. It would have been impossible to make up the
remaining half Corps at all, but for the fact that, specially for the
war, a large number of Militiamen and of ‘efficient volunteers’ have
offered their services. The ‘efficient volunteers’ have enlisted under a
special clause which expressly limits their services to the period of
the war, and, as a maximum, to a period of two years. Furthermore, the
strength of the Artillery is deplorably deficient.

A short time ago there was fear lest the miscellaneous collection of
weapons with which the Artillery was armed would produce confusion. This
was remedied by activity in the Arsenal, and by giving out contracts to
private firms. The result was the production of numbers of the so-called
12–pounder gun both for the Indian and home batteries. Unfortunately
this gun has been condemned by the unanimous report of our ablest
artillerymen. It is too heavy for the Horse Artillery, which loses
mobility. On the other hand, the Field Artillery will have to meet the
guns of Foreign Powers, no one of which throws a shell of less than 15
pounds. Most of the foreign field guns are even more powerful. The
ammunition is most unsatisfactory. Everything has been sacrificed to
securing an excessive muzzle velocity, which commends itself very much
to mere experimentalists, but is regarded as useless by practical
soldiers.

There has been a dangerous tendency to leave these questions altogether
in the hands of an Ordnance Committee of men without experience of the
requirements of an army. For a sporting rifle, the sportsman says what
he wants, and the manufacturer applies his skill to furnishing what is
asked for. For our Artillery the shopman decides. The men who have to
handle the gun in war, or who have studied the experience of others who
have handled it in war, are simply ignored.


                       EMBODIMENT OF THE MILITIA.

The general embodiment of the militia has shown serious defects in our
system. These are glaring enough among the English and Scotch militia
regiments, but among the Irish they are appalling. Many of the Irish
militia battalions are now in the neighbourhood of Aldershot in a
special camp. Some of them, like those of Antrim, Tipperary, Tyrone, are
a splendid body of men. The great deficiency in some of the battalions
is in the correspondence between their numbers and the muster rolls. One
correspondent reports having ascertained that there are not a few Irish
militiamen who have been in the habit of belonging to as many as five
different corps at one time. ‘The way the thing has been done is this:
It has never been the practice to call out simultaneously the militia
battalions for training; it would interfere inconveniently with the
labour market. Certain men, taking advantage of this fact, have made a
regular trade of getting the money allowed for one battalion after
another as it has been called out. Indeed, so well has the fact been
known that it is reported that not infrequently the Sergeant-Major has
requested the adjutant of certain battalions to beg that the time of
muster might be postponed till after the end of the training of another
battalion, in order to ensure a full attendance. Now, however, that the
battalions are gathered together the effects are visible enough. I am
told that in some battalions nearly half the proper strength is wanting.
Some steps are certainly required to cure this evil. The men, it must be
observed, don’t “desert” their proper battalion because they attend all
their drills. Perhaps now that the militia is embodied it might be
possible, legally, to try these men as deserters from the corps with
which they do not appear. That, however, is a question for the military
powers, not for your humble correspondent. What I am quite certain of is
that they will not be tried. Our already slender numbers would be most
formidably reduced if all these men were treated as criminals. Moreover,
they are not at bottom bad fellows many of them. The idea that it is a
crime to get a little more pay out of the public in return for doing a
little more drill never entered their minds. The general effect of their
action, of course, does not affect them at all. “Why, yer honour, didn’t
I put in me toime honest for me pay?” one of them with whom I was
expostulating said to me the other day. They are, of course, the best
drilled men we have. They have had so much of it. For this war, at all
events, it is too late to devise a remedy for this sham.’

Just at present the headquarters of the militia are in the Staff
College, that institution having been broken up for the war, and the
sixty officers usually there have been sent to rejoin their regiments,
or to fill up billets where they are badly wanted. The tents of the
militia battalions cover the ground in the neighbourhood. Aldershot is
occupied with the brigades that are being formed in hot haste to
complete the force in the field. The stores for the 2d Army Corps were
by no means in the same state of readiness as those for the 1st. But in
Aldershot, at least, many of the waggons were actually ready, and,
thanks to the delay which has taken place, and the costly and feverish
purchases all over the country of stores, probably this portion of the
two corps will be ready when it is required to move.

We hear from all parts of the world of enormous purchases of transport
material of all kinds which will be hurried into the Levant as soon as
it is safe to send them there. Mules especially are being everywhere
purchased.

The horses that have been of late years registered with the Government
for purchase for war have proved invaluable. Indeed, without them we
could not possibly have equipped the troops. Many of them are splendid
animals, and will greatly assist in making up our deficiencies in
draught horses for the artillery and train.


                      CALLING OUT THE VOLUNTEERS.

As soon as the excitement in France began to be realised in this country
two opinions strove for mastery. At first there was some little
disposition to insist on the recall of the troops from all distant
expeditions. But in a short time every one saw that for this it was
practically now too late. A very large portion of our force was in the
Levant already. That force had been dispatched with the full assent of
the country, because in whatever way it was to be employed, as to which
there were all kinds of conflicting rumours, it was felt that we were
now bound in honour to assist in resisting the Russian attempt to crush
Bulgaria. There was also a certain speculative interest of the ‘What
will he do with it?’ kind, as to the nature of the campaign which Lord
Wolseley has designed. On the whole, though croakers, some of whom were
known not to be altogether exempt from personal and private pique, are
to be heard here and there, a general confidence prevails. Men record
how in ’82, at a time when everyone thought that Arabi’s power in Egypt
was too great for the English force to overcome without a long campaign,
he had announced and allowed it to be published, before he left England,
that ‘whatever resistance Arabi might offer, the campaign would be over
in three months,’ and how exactly that prediction had been fulfilled by
the return of the English troops within that time. It is recalled again
that, though, after all the delays that had taken place, it was
impossible to say, before the Nile Campaign started, whether we should
be in time to save Gordon. Lord Wolseley had announced before leaving
England that we should reach hand to Gordon about Christmas time; and
that this promise again, despite all the difficulties of the Nile, had
been exactly fulfilled by the dispatch of Stewart and the steamer
expedition, which, not by any fault of his, did not ‘reach hand’ the few
days earlier that were necessary to save Gordon. Others have recalled
how this exactness of calculation and prediction had attended all his
earlier campaigns. It is felt that now or never we must settle the
pretensions of Russia on India and in the East; that if we did not take
advantage of the rashness of Russia in attacking us whilst she was
engaged with Germany and Austria, we could never again count upon the
support of those allies. The alliance with Italy is immensely popular. A
few manly sentences from Mr. Balfour in announcing his proposal to call
out the volunteers, and one of the finest speeches which Mr. Chamberlain
has ever made in reply to a rather snappish little speech of Lord
Randolph, expressed the popular sentiment, and with general consent on
May 17th, the day before the Declaration of War against Russia, the
volunteers were called out.

[Illustration:

  CALLING OUT THE VOLUNTEERS—PARADE OF THE SIGNALLERS OF THE ST.
    MARTIN’S LE GRAND CORPS.
]

The response to the call has been very remarkable. It has, of course,
been necessary everywhere to make special arrangements for the
marshalling of the volunteers interfering as little as possible with
business. But, whereas with the militia, unfortunately, the contrast
between the peace effective and those who now show on parade is
melancholy, with the volunteers it is almost startling. A few men have
been with great reluctance, and probably only for a time, obliged by
business necessities to withdraw from the ranks. Their places have been
filled over and over again by passed ‘efficients,’ who have returned to
the battalions. But that is not all. The change that has come over the
spirit of the men is reported from all quarters. During quiet, peace
times it was very difficult to get any response from the volunteers if
appeal was made to them as representing the purpose of the British
people to take the defence of the country on their own shoulders. Those
did not understand the volunteers who so addressed them. They were
volunteers because they liked it, because others joined, because they
were good shots, and liked competing for the prizes, because they liked
the fun of skirmishing and outdoor practice of all kinds, because it was
a change from the sedentary habits of ordinary life. But now that the
nation is roused, when all men feel that they would like, if they could,
to play their part in the service _of England_ here, when Scotland does
not intend to lag behind, and when the blood of Irishmen is up, the talk
is different. ‘What other men want to do, _we_ can’ is rather the
feeling.

At the same time the contrast between different corps is certainly a
marked thing. The steady work of some, the indifference of others now
tells. No past ‘butter’ compensates for present weakness. It is quite
extraordinary what has been done by some corps to prepare for present
events. The Lord Mayor’s subscription has greatly assisted the
Metropolitan Corps to be ready for the field. Generally, the town corps
have had great facilities for turning out promptly. The Government
grant, which has been defined already as payable on mobilisation,
suffices to provide most that is required. In the big towns, where some
steps have been taken beforehand to ascertain where waggons, carts,
horses, stores, could best be obtained, and where some of the officers
responsible knew just what was wanted and had it all tabulated
beforehand, the battalions and brigades have formed up ready to move, so
that they could live anywhere, with wonderful rapidity.

In the country districts, on the other hand, the differences between
different brigades is most marked. Many of them have been telegraphing
up to the Horse Guards to know where they are to obtain this, that, and
the other. The Horse Guards is overwhelmed with work. Local knowledge is
what is wanted. Here and there officers have been sent down from London
to assist the more helpless corps; but few can be spared. The result in
almost all these cases is slow and unsatisfactory. On the other hand,
from some of the country brigades we hear the most encouraging reports.
It appears that a system has been worked out in certain corps in
accordance with suggestions thrown out in some articles in the _United
Service Magazine_. It has even been practised during peace time. In
accordance with this, first of all, long ago application was made to
certain owners of carts and horses to know whether, in case of the
volunteers being mobilised, they would be ready to dispose of their
property at a certain fixed price, and whether they would undertake
always to have a cart, for instance, of that description ready. There
has been found to be no practical difficulty in making these
arrangements beforehand.

Then a set of printed papers of different colours has been drawn out and
kept in the Brigade office. These take a form of this kind:—

‘Private ——. On receiving by telegraph the word, “Mobilise,” you
will....’

On the lists of names kept in the office those men who are to fetch
carts, horses, etc., are detailed. On the printed papers prepared for
these it is recorded, ‘You will at once go to No. X. Y. Street, where
you will find a horse with such and such harness ready for you. You will
take it to No. A. C. Street, where you will find a cart ready for you.
You will harness in the horse and proceed to Mr. Jones’s, No. F. E.
Street. There you will find Privates Blank and Dash, who will have ready
for you the stores to be loaded on the cart, and will load them. As soon
as the cart is loaded you will drive to the rendezvous of the corps at
Anywhere Park.’

This will give an indication of the method which has been pursued. The
Government grant on mobilisation suffices to cover the necessary
expenses. The contrast between the rapidity with which this system works
and the confusion which exists where it has not been adopted; the ease
with which the whole thing is done, is, from all the accounts we have
received, most striking. Unfortunately, where no such preparation has
been made the delay and confusion which result are not the only evil
effect. The discouragement of the men from finding that they have not
been as well looked after as others, the want of confidence in their
officers, has a most demoralising effect. They hear that other brigades
have already marched to the great camps which are being formed all over
England, and they see that they have no prospect of being ready for a
long time. The praises which are daily lavished on other corps for their
extraordinary promptitude and smartness are gall and wormwood to them.
The women chaff them mercilessly. It will not do to throw the blame on
the ‘system’ or ‘the authorities,’ those convenient phrases which are
commonly employed to disguise the absence of a man. Others have managed
well enough under the present system and with the present authorities.
British self-help, guided by forethought and knowledge, has been the
secret.




                        THE POSITION OF AFFAIRS.


                                                       LONDON, _May 28_.

Certainly we have been fortunate in the passages which our transports
have made. It only shows what can be done under favourable conditions of
weather, with selected coal and selected stokers. We understand that the
Admiralty pressed on the Government the importance of attending to these
points in a matter in which it might come to be a question of a run
against time across a danger zone. As we anticipated in writing our last
account of the events of the week, the Declaration of War by France was
issued after we had gone to press on Thursday, May 19th. It was
therefore only barely in time that our great mass of transports safely
passed into the Levant. For, as will be seen from the telegraphic report
of our correspondent—received last night, so that it has somewhat
delayed our issue—the French Fleet has lost no time in following up the
Declaration of War. The telegraphic dispatch, which was sent off on the
very evening of the greatest naval engagement of modern times, explains
clearly the sequence of events which has for some time to come made the
Mediterranean once more a safe highway for us. We need not dilate on the
vast importance of this event. In the present case it is not merely that
our flag is once more supreme at sea; it means that the terrible
anxieties, which had been awakened in the public mind as to the possible
fate of our Eastern expedition, in case Sir George Tryon should not
secure a complete triumph, are now at rest. With the Mediterranean
secure it will be a very easy matter to regain possession of the Black
Sea.

Whatever may be the ultimate purposes of the Italians in regard to an
Algerian expedition, we think that there will now be no injury to the
public service in letting it be known that the preparations which were
recently made with that apparent object were only a _ruse de guerre_. Of
course, in order that they might attain the object which they have so
successfully achieved of drawing the French Fleet out into the open sea,
it was necessary that these facts should be known only to Sir George
Tryon. Our correspondent, therefore, telegraphs under the impression
which prevailed in the fleet at the time. The rule is a sound one, even
in regard to fleets where they have communication with the land, that
what is believed among your own people will very soon be believed by the
enemy. But the Italian Government, as much as our own, recognises the
importance of the principle of concentrating its efforts at one point at
one time as far as that may be at all possible. The Italians have quite
enough on their hands in their war by land and sea with France. Our
efforts are already directed to the East. All those most desirable
objects, which the people ‘who know,’ or ‘have been there,’ or have been
‘ten years resident’ in various places, have been of late pressing upon
the Government through the newspapers, really must wait till we have
time, and armies, and fleets to attend to them. ‘One thing at a time’ is
a simple principle of military and naval affairs, but it is one which
the casual correspondents of newspapers never keep before their minds.

Meantime we have received news of the great battle between France and
Germany, a report of which we have been expecting.




                PREPARATIONS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN FLEET.

                    THE ALLIED FLEET AT PORT MAHON.


            (_From an Officer in Sir George Tryon’s Fleet._)

I may begin the story of our great success by reminding your readers
that when the French violated the Belgian Frontier, and we mobilised our
fleet, Sir George Tryon had ten battleships with him, while the French
were supposed to have about eighteen available for sea at Toulon, for
they had withdrawn thither the Mediterranean and Levant Squadrons
simultaneously with their demand upon Germany.

Sir George Tryon seems to have been very early informed that if war
arose the Home Government must depend greatly on the alliance of Italy
and Austria to maintain command of the Mediterranean Sea, for a great
naval force would be necessary in the North to counteract the designs of
Russia and France on the German sea-coast. Sir George Tryon, on his
part, talked quite openly—which was said to be a wonder for him—of the
fact that he was not desirous of large reinforcements. He did not
believe, he said, that, if it came to the point, the French would bring
out their older wooden ships, such as the _Colbert_, the _Suffren_, or
even the _Richelieu_. The Italians, on the other hand, would most
probably be able to complete eight of their very fine ships, while
Austria might bring four or five vessels, which, though inferior, would
not be ineffective. As it turned out, Tryon was only reinforced by two
ships, the _Ajax_ and the _Benbow_. Thus, supposing the eight Italians
could be brought into line, and supposing the French produced eighteen
ships, Tryon’s fleet would be but two sail stronger than that of Admiral
Rieunier. As events developed themselves, it was plain that Sir George
grew anxious; but it was, both with himself and Admiral Markham, the
anxiety of eagerness, and we were all very well assured that if it came
to blows we should be daringly, as well as efficiently, led.

On the withdrawal of the fleet from the Black Sea, we were all assembled
at Malta, where the garrison was labouring night and day in constructing
out-works and exercising in the batteries. For us, on the other hand,
there was absolutely nothing to do, except to keep our coals and stores
complete day by day, which was not a very arduous undertaking. There
were, however, constant and long conferences between the Admirals and
the captains of the battle-ships, and it was no secret that every one of
these took the form of discussions over possible or probable forms of
attack or defence by the fleet at sea. It came to be accepted that if we
met the French in open fight we should be numerically inferior, and the
question was, how we should act from that point of view? The discussions
amongst us, who were not directly responsible, took every variety of
form. Sometimes a hot party would arise, claiming that it was perfectly
useless to make plans until the enemy disclosed his. This was met by
another party declaring that, if plans were not carefully made
beforehand, there would be no plans at all. This, again, was taken up by
a third party, which claimed that there was only one plan of any use,
and that was, as soon as the hostile fleet was seen, to make a general
signal, ‘Ram the enemy,’ and leave each ship to fight it out with its
fellow. When it was pointed out that perhaps the enemy would not stay to
be rammed, the general answer was, ‘Well, it is all the same. There is
nothing like the ram.’

Two things made themselves clear in these arguments; first, that hardly
any one—even amongst the captains—had ever thought seriously on what now
seemed to be drawing so very close to us; and, secondly, that the
Admirals were beginning to lay down certain definite principles, which
the captains were inclined to accept as being very likely to turn out
sound. Before very long the whole result came out in a general order
which was confidential to the captains, the commanders, and the
first-lieutenants of the battle-ships.

Without professing to give the exact wording, I am able to say that the
first principle laid down was the necessity of avoiding giving a friend
the ram, or firing into him either by gun or torpedo. The second
principle was the desirability of so arranging that, if possible, an
enemy’s ship should sustain the fire of more than one of our own ships;
or at least so guarding things that no one of our ships should find
herself opposed by two of the enemy’s.

The memorandum went on to say that, as a consequence of these
principles, ships attached to one another were on no account to separate
unless forced to do so; but that if confusion arose, ships were to keep
their speed and pass out of the enemy’s fleet in the direction opposite
to that from which they passed into it, with the view of reforming out
of the smoke, in order to renew the attack.

In any case, said the order, the enemy will be approached by the fleet
in two or three columns in line ahead, at a speed of about ten knots.
The flag or senior officers will lead their columns, and in whatever
form the enemy may approach—if he does approach—they will endeavour to
cut through at different points, using their guns, torpedoes, and rams
indiscriminately as circumstances offer. In order to avoid all chance of
injuring friends, the columns will be arranged in echelon. The
Commander-in-Chief will lead the first column, and the leaders of
succeeding columns will not be expected to enter the enemy’s fleet until
the rear ships of the preceding column may be supposed to have passed
through. After passing through, the ships not disabled will re-form and
renew the attack in the same way.

If the enemy retires, making use of his stern guns, the fleet will be
formed in line abreast or quarter-line, and every endeavour must be made
to close with him, to ram his ships upon their sterns or quarters, or,
in the event of failure, to carry them by boarding from that position.

The general opinion on this memorandum was that it said quite enough,
and yet not too much. It was quite clear and plain, and nothing seemed
wanting but the declaration of war and the attack of a superior French
Fleet.

We were very much surprised to hear from England that troops were on
their way out, with the idea of operations in the Black Sea. It seemed
very risky, when France might declare war at any moment. But the general
belief is that the Ministry must have had some assurances from the
French Government which we know nothing about. Anyhow the transports
began to arrive at Malta in a continual stream, and there received
orders to proceed to Cyprus, where we hear preparations are being made
for the reception of the troops. The _Orient_, with the Duke of
Connaught on board, did not come in; she only closed sufficiently to
receive a signal changing her destination to Cyprus, and went on.
Several cruisers from the Channel appeared at intervals, watching over
the safety of the troopers; they were not interfered with, and went on
to Cyprus.

News of the Spanish alliance and orders to proceed to Spezzia to form a
junction with the Italian Fleet came simultaneously, and as the ships
steamed out of the harbour the whole population swarmed over the forts
and walls and cheered in the wildest way, which, on a signal from the
Admiral, the ships returned heartily. At Spezzia we found six ships
ready, with orders from home to watch Toulon, but not to make any
attacks upon the French unless they should attempt to attack Italy by
sea. Simultaneously with these orders we heard of the Duke of
Edinburgh’s wonderful and bloodless success in the North Sea. But there
was a general sound of congratulation that our force in the
Mediterranean was not powerful enough to compel such obedience as we had
enforced in the North. The Italians, ashore and afloat, were in a
wonderful state of enthusiasm. They crowded our ships during the few
days we lay at Spezzia, and the women were so demonstrative of affection
that some of the older officers did not half like it.

It soon became known that Sir George Tryon had decided to make Port
Mahon the headquarters of the fleet, and to send cruisers only before
Toulon. I should have said that we were now very fairly supplied in this
way. They had been arriving from England almost daily while we were at
Malta, and we had now fourteen, large and small, with the fleet.

For a reason which I did not at first understand, we only took four out
of the six Italian ships that were ready with us to Port Mahon, namely,
the _Andrea Doria_, the _Francisco Morosimi_, the _Re Umberto_, and the
_Rugiero di Lauria_. Moreover, we left at Spezzia the _Thunderer_,
_Ajax_, and _Agamemnon_. We noted that the Italian ships we took with us
were the newest, and that those of our own we left were, in a sense,
‘lame ducks.’ But still there was a good deal of wonder that we should
deliberately reduce our force to fourteen sail when we were almost
closing with the enemy. It was whispered about later that orders from
home had dictated the detachment, that war would be immediately declared
by England against France, and that an attack would be made by Italian
troops carried chiefly in the _Italia_ and _Lepanto_, and supported by a
combined Anglo-Italian squadron against Algiers.

However, we steamed away to Port Mahon, and in this magnificent harbour
found a fresh relay of colliers and two more cruisers, the _Apollo_ and
_Sappho_, which showed us that there was a good deal of foresight at
headquarters. We had the declaration of war immediately, and then we
began to see where we were. We were, in fact, at bay. In no case was the
French Fleet strong enough to hope to prevent our putting to sea, and
there was practically nothing that France could do with her fleet, as
long as ours was intact. And now, too, I began to see that we were, at
Minorca, in a position to cover the proposed attack on Algiers. Any
attempt of the Toulon Fleet to drive off our attacking forces would be
liable to be met by a counter attack from ourselves. Yet if France could
really produce eighteen battleships out of Toulon, while we could only
furnish thirteen, we were running very great risks.

However, we went to work in a very business-like way. Tryon placed five
of his largest cruisers, including the _Amphion_, _Australia_, and
_Undaunted_, on the line to Toulon, giving orders that Lord Charles
Beresford in the _Undaunted_, with Dunlop in the _Australia_ to back him
up, were to undertake the watch on the Toulon Fleet, closing with the
harbour after dark, and drawing off before daylight each morning, but
not so far as to lose touch with the port. Then the other three were to
spread themselves towards Minorca, and to work backwards and forwards,
so as to signal to each other and to Minorca at least once in every
twenty-four hours.

For us at Port Mahon it again became a time of inaction; nothing to do
but exercise and keep our coal supply up. But we now lay with fires
banked and steam at half an hour’s notice.

We soon learnt that the seven ships had left Spezzia with several
transports and cruisers; and we began to think that if France had any
chance at all, she might have it by falling suddenly and swiftly on this
weak detachment. The Admirals seemed sure that she would, and the utmost
anxiety attended the reports from the signal station.




                        THE BATTLE OF SARDINIA.

                  THE RAMMING OF THE ‘AMIRAL BAUDIN.’


It was just after daylight on the morning of the fourth day that a sort
of cheering cry of ‘The enemy are at sea!’ ran all through the ships. Up
went the simple signal, ‘Weigh,’ and there was really a horrible
contrast between our anxiety and eagerness and the unmoved grind and
crunch as link by link the cables came slowly in. But this was soon
over, and we were at sea, forming at once in two lines ahead, as before
arranged. The report was that the French had left Toulon twelve hours
before, steering about S.E., but it had not been possible to count their
numbers owing to the darkness. We steamed due east at half-speed; but it
was plain to us all that if the French passed through the Straits of
Bonifacio we might easily miss them, even though our cruisers were well
spread out both ahead and astern. While we were in the middle of debate,
down there rolled upon us as dense a fog as ever I saw in the
Mediterranean. The Admiral had provided for this as for everything else,
and we knew that we must preserve order with the steam syrens only,
without the aid of guns; but as it was no use keeping speed, we slowed
down. We were like this all day and all night, and at daylight it seemed
as thick as ever. The ships had of course been all cleared for action,
and we were ready to open fire in a minute, though one naturally prayed
that the fog would lift before the enemy appeared. At 8 A.M. it began to
clear, and at 9 we distinctly counted twenty-one steam-ships to the
south of us. The flag-ship immediately made the signal for eight knots,
and gradually altered course towards the strange fleet. We were soon
able to make them out as sixteen French battle-ships, in the indented
line abreast, steering south, with five cruisers in front of them. They
were smoking up a good deal, but at ten or twelve miles distance we
could not tell whether they were going at speed.

We soon found they were not, for we began to gain on them, and the
signal was made for ten knots. We could tell by the position of the
steam cones, that every ship had steam to spare, and I suppose it was
the desire of making sure of a compact fleet which kept us at
comparatively low speed. Even at ten knots we continued to gain
considerably. We were quite two miles off when the French began to open
fire from their stern guns, and I am bound to say we were all very much
surprised at the bad shots. They fell short and over, right and left,
but after quite an hour few ships apparently had been badly hit.

We were still in two lines ahead and were making no reply at all to the
French fire. We could not understand, when we had got within 3000 yards,
why the Admiral did not put us in line abreast and open fire. But in the
middle of our wonder we suddenly saw the French ships open out to right
and left, and before we knew where we were the whole mass of the
battle-ships were coming right down upon us. We saw at once that it was
in anticipation of some such manœuvre that we had not quitted our first
formation.

But the wisdom of our Admirals was at once shown. Orders were given to
train the guns abeam and to let the enemy have it at the closest range,
abstaining from fire till then. The French, on the other hand, never
ceased to fire; but the smoke they made so surrounded them that it was
plain they were wasting their ammunition, and did not see so well where
they were going. But their rapidity of approach was tremendous, and I
could note it as I had no guns to look after and could see nearly all
round from the sheltered spot I had chosen.

My ship was near the middle of the port line, and I soon saw the great
jet of smoke from the _Trafalgar_, followed by the roar which denoted
the simultaneous discharge of a whole broadside. In less than half a
minute there was the puff and the roar of the second ship, the
_Collingwood_, and almost immediately I saw that the _Nile_, at the head
of the other line, had fired. But then I directly saw what I had not
been prepared for. I saw the _Nile_ turning round sharp to port, and,
looking to the head of my own line, I saw the _Trafalgar_ steaming along
our line on the opposite course to ours. It flashed through my mind like
a shot, that every ship was turning round after she had fired her
broadside, and that consequently the heads of the French lines or
groups, after running the gauntlet of our lines, would be met by the
ships that had first fired on them, and that as the battle had begun by
the ships passing in opposite directions, it would be continued by all
the ships with their heads in the same direction.

I do not pretend to say that I knew what all this meant at the moment;
indeed, I did not know anything in another minute, for the roar and
shake of the whole of our guns, trained on the port beam, knocked the
power of thinking out of me. Recovering myself in a cloud of choking
smoke, I was first aware that there must have been very little reply to
our fire, but two signalmen were stretched on the deck beside me, both
quite still; one with his shoulder torn entirely away, and the other
bleeding profusely from a wound in his head. There were also, as if
through the ship, new sorts of voices which, in hurried and confused
utterance, warned me that there were death and wounds elsewhere.

But there was no time to think of it. We were wheeling round after our
next ahead; and out of the dense smoke which we were leaving, issued
stray missiles tearing past, and sometimes striking davits or
stanchions, or shattering the planking of a boat. There was nothing, in
fact, now but a roar of guns all round us, and we were covered with a
canopy of smoke. The sole design perceptible was that we were only
firing into the smoke to starboard, and no missiles were coming from the
port side, while every now and then we got a glimpse of our next ahead
and next astern.

As we steamed on, messages went from the captain to the lieutenants not
to fire any more till they could see the enemy; and it was becoming
clear that the French fire was ceasing, though whereabouts they were
could hardly be ascertained. Presently, however, we found ourselves
quite clear of smoke and could see then that the French ships must, most
of them, have stopped, for our vessels—as well as could be seen—were
nearly in their old formations, while the French were well astern, still
somewhat entangled by the smoke, and evidently in some confusion.

Out of this smoke there quickly emerged a ship, which we made out to be
the flag-ship _Formidable_ with a considerable heel to port and steering
to the N.W.

With the general signal flying that the Division was to continue its
course, the _Trafalgar_ suddenly put on steam and went after the
_Formidable_ full speed. The two ships were now in close action and
enveloped in smoke, so that we could only make out their positions
occasionally, the _Trafalgar_ apparently hanging on the starboard
quarter of the _Formidable_. The firing did not last more than ten
minutes or a quarter of an hour, when, the smoke clearing away, it was
seen that the _Formidable’s_ colours were down.

What had happened we only knew afterwards. The _Formidable_ had been
badly torpedoed in passing, and was steaming as she hoped out of action
when we saw her. As the _Trafalgar_ approached, she made a short gallant
defence with her guns, and fired two torpedoes at her; but the water was
rising in the stoke-holds, and it was impossible to keep steam. Admiral
Markham, seeing plainly what the case was, passed close under the
_Formidable’s_ stern, and hailed to claim surrender in the interests of
humanity, or he would ram and sink her. It was the chance of war, and
there was nothing but surrender before our gallant opponent.

Meantime it was plain to be seen how well Sir George Tryon’s orders had
worked. Some of our ships were frightfully knocked about, and the
_Benbow_ was almost in a sinking state from a number of shot-holes
between wind and water; while the _Edinburgh_ was all down by the head,
having caught a torpedo near the stem, but the whole of the ships were
in two lines as they entered into action, and they now re-formed and
headed towards the French, leaving the _Benbow_, _Edinburgh_, and the
prize French flag-ship together, attended by two or three of the
cruisers.

But the most frightful incident of the battle took place in the other
line, and I was not an eye-witness of it. I have not mentioned the
_Polyphemus_ before, but she was with us and sailed with us. It seems
Sir George Tryon’s orders to her were simply to keep out of the way in
the first instance, and to strike home should any opportunity offer.
Captain Brooke, it appears, running out to starboard of the Admiral’s
column, saw his chance in the smoke, and ran straight at the nearest
French ship, whose attention was taken up by the fire of our ships on
her other side. The shock was horrible, and she scarce had time to
extricate herself, when the _Amiral Baudin_ reeled and sank.


                     FLIGHT OF THE FRENCH SQUADRON.

It did not appear that the rest of the French ships were as much knocked
about as we were, but we afterwards learnt the cause of this. It was
simply that the heavy shell of the French had made a greater show on us
during our first approach than we had been aware of; but, in passing,
our light guns had made terrible havoc amongst the unprotected guns’
crews in the French batteries, while, as they had not reserved their
fire, it was not so destructive to us. Then, too, it seems that our
manœuvre was entirely unexpected, and paralysed the action of the
leading ships after they had, as they supposed, passed through our
fleet. It was, again, our light guns which produced effect, but without
making it so visible to outside observers.

The loss of the flag-ship, of the _Amiral Baudin_, and the great loss in
killed and wounded did, however, act in demoralising the ships’
companies, so that three or four of the ships had already drawn off to
the north-eastward, and there was for the time a good deal of confusion;
but they turned their heads from us and gradually drew out into a line
abreast, nearly as we met them at first.

No doubt fearing a repetition of their former manœuvre, Sir George Tryon
kept his fleet still in two lines; but as the French swept round,
steering first N.E. and then nearly due north for Toulon, we were broken
up into four short columns, and these were presently put into quarter
line.

And now we had a game of long bowls for some time, without apparently
much damage to either side. We were always being checked in our pursuit
by the failure first of one ship, and then of another, to keep steam;
and it seemed to be precisely the same with the French, so that darkness
closed upon us without either the French being able to draw out of
action, or our being able to make it a close one.

Before daylight, our reckoning brought us so close up to Toulon, that,
as we had lost sight of the enemy three hours before, signal was made to
slow down, and at daylight we could just make out the French closing
into the land and disappearing.

Such was the Battle of Sardinia, as I made it out. The French risked it
in the hope of falling on the weak Anglo-Italian squadron, and so saving
Algeria. It was almost as great a risk for us, being so numerically
inferior; but, accepting the position all along, our Admirals so managed
that we suffered much less loss in the end. But the feature which struck
us all as most remarkable was the fact that while we had two ships
practically disabled, and the French had suffered but the same loss, yet
we were victorious by reason of the terrible carnage which our lighter
guns had caused in the enemy’s ships.

_P.S._—I have just learnt that the real cause of the French retreat was
news that reached them by a cruiser of the approach of the squadron from
Algiers. This Sir George Tryon expected all along, but we knew nothing
of it. We met the ships next day. News from England has just come by the
_Blonde_. The German Fleet has joined that of Sir Michael Seymour in the
Gulf of Finland, and he has sent home five of his ships. The Duke of
Edinburgh has detached two of his, and the whole seven are making the
best of their way, with several cruisers, to reinforce us. All idea of
further attack on Algiers is given up, and Admiral Markham will sail
with ten battle-ships and six cruisers to the Levant, to convoy the
troops into the Black Sea, and then to mask the Russian Fleet in
Sebastopol. So the Black Sea expedition is to go on. Yet the general
opinion amongst us is that our Government are running considerable
risks, and that we are relying on the principle of ‘Nothing venture,
nothing have.’




       THE FRANCO-GERMAN CAMPAIGN—CAVALRY ENGAGEMENT NEAR LIGNY.

                         DEFEAT OF THE FRENCH.


          (_From our Special Correspondent with the Germans._)

                                                         NAMUR, _May 5_.

A report reaches me to-night that the Germans from Metz light siege
train since early on the morning of the 3d. The guns in the annex
batteries of the French defences not being mounted yet, each fort was
surrounded by a circle of fire, to which it could only return a
divergent reply. The forts are now shapeless heaps of ruin, the
cavaliers cut down, and the guns either dismounted or buried under the
earth thrown out by the bursting shells. No attempt at assault has yet
been made.

An attempt at a raid by the German cavalry from the direction of
Luxembourg—Dun is also reported, without great results. Two squadrons
have managed to slip round the Verdun defences, and re-entered German
territory near Mars-la-Tour, last night, destroying railways and wires
as they went.

                                                         NAMUR, _May 9_.

There has been a smart cavalry action to-day in the vicinity of Ligny
and St. Amand, names so well known in the Waterloo campaign, in which
the French have very decidedly had the worst of it.

Before commencing my account, I will add that the censorship here is
very strict indeed, and that no mention whatever is permitted of numbers
of corps or regiments, or of the names of their commanders; as these
data are invaluable to an enemy in enabling him to check the truth of
information received, and it is always possible that the wires between
here and Brussels may be tapped.

Yesterday afternoon I found a place in a train going to Gembloux, where
our Cavalry Division had arrived during the morning. Arrived there, I
met an old friend in the Hussars, who told me that he and three other
officers had been selected for a reconnaissance ride next morning, and
that a place in their carriage was at my service. The idea of driving
out to a real cavalry action struck me as singular, so I asked for
information, and was told by my friend that he and his comrades, who
were all noted steeplechase riders, had had several horses in training
for a meeting, to which the war had put a stop, and had been told by
their colonel to train the horses a little ‘fat’ and bring them along to
the front—he would be glad of their services, and find them an
opportunity for distinction greater than any to be won between the
flags. They were to have their horses led out for them, and, as soon as
the expected collision occurred, to mount, slip through the enemy’s
scouts in the confusion of the scrimmage, and ride as far as possible to
the south and westward to see what was going on behind the cavalry
screen.

Needless to say, I accepted the offer, and 2 A.M. found me with my
friends driving out along the road to Ligny, where lay the outposts.

Latest reports indicated the enemy’s cavalry, at least a division
strong, between Fleurus and Charleroi. The advance-guard of our
Division, the Hussar brigade, moved off about an hour before sunrise,
following the line of the great road. We stayed behind to await the
arrival of the main body, and presently moved over in the direction of
St. Amand. Soon the main body was seen approaching, and about the same
time we could see the Hussars falling back across the railway, and a
report arrived that the French were coming on in force.

The Divisional Commander rode forward to reconnoitre the ground in
front, and left orders to the main body to form for attack under cover
in a hollow in rear; the same, by chance, in which Blücher had stationed
the reserves of his right before the battle of Ligny in 1815.

It was a perfectly faultless morning, and the sun was just beginning to
rise when we saw three batteries of French Horse Artillery cross the
railway and come out into the plain. Our own batteries were in the act
of unlimbering, at double intervals, to allow for the melinite shells;
and as they crossed the sky-line the French, too, saw them, and came
into ‘action front.’ The two first shots on each side fell almost
simultaneously, and the duel began. The hollow in our front and the
blinding rays of the sun full in the eyes of the enemy gave us an
immense advantage, and in five minutes our side had ‘ranged,’ and one
French gun was sent flying. Meanwhile our Hussars had been falling back,
and were wheeling up into position as second and third lines to the two
heavy brigades.

The French Cavalry were now crossing the railway in line of squadron
columns and immediately afterwards formed ‘line,’ and the signal to
advance was given by our Commander. As our horse crossed the plateau on
which the guns were in action, ‘Troops half left’ was sounded, and the
French hearing the signal, no doubt, and seeing also that we were not
quite in line, must have guessed our intention to attack their left, and
endeavoured to meet it by ‘Shouldering.’

Reaching the hollow our cavalry again wheeled into line, crossed the
little brooklet without disorder, and then, by silent signal, broke into
column of troops to the right, and galloped up the hollow in a long
sweeping stride—their distances perfectly preserved. This movement
promised to bring them out right on the flank and rear of the French
left, but the next moment we saw the French Reserve, which had hitherto
been hidden by trees along the lane from Perwin to Bry—moving in a
direction that would bring them right on the flank of our first line.
The situation was most critical—we all held our breath—but the next
moment we heard the regimental call of the leading regiment, followed by
the long ‘G’s’ of ‘line to the front,’ and we knew that the danger was
seen and met.

Simultaneously also the tail of the column still in sight wheeled into
line, and came dashing forward to the attack.

The French were already in a poor condition to meet it. The attempt to
‘shoulder’ the long line had loosened their order, and from the moment
they came in sight our gunners had turned their full power upon them
with results almost indescribable. Out of the dust and smoke of the
bursting shells we saw limbs and bodies thrown high in the air, and the
right and second line of the enemy was already in hopeless confusion
before the blow fell on their left. This wing had escaped our shells,
for to fire on it would have imperilled our own men. They saw the danger
coming, and two squadrons endeavoured to wheel up to meet it, but they
were too late, the next moment our trumpets rang out the ‘charge,’ and
with a roar of cheering our men dashed forward; we heard the crash of
the collision, for a moment saw horses rear up and fall backward, and
then the dust rose and shut out all further vision. But the French did
not bolt, the wreck of their right and second line wheeled up, rallied
on their officers as best they could, and dashed into the _mêlée_, where
they too were lost to sight. From time to time we saw groups of our
white-coated Cuirassiers and the dark blue Uhlans emerge from the
dust-cloud, then wheel and go back again, and for some moments the fight
here became stationary, for the French on this point outnumbered us two
to one. Then suddenly from out of the hollow we again heard the charge
sounding, and for a second or two caught sight of the left of our third
line, as with perfectly closed ranks they dashed into the _mêlée_. This
blow settled the matter. The mass again came into motion; first a few
files, followed by more, began to drop off to the rear, and presently
the whole cloud, gathering pace as it went, swept down right on to the
flank of their horse batteries, who, seeing the danger coming, had
endeavoured to limber up in the full fire of our artillery. But they
were too late, the crowd swept over them, and when it had passed we saw
eight guns still on the ground, with some Hussars and Uhlans busy around
them.

What happened on our right I could only partially see, the trees
interfering with my line of vision. I am therefore dependent on the
testimony of others.

The regiment that had ‘front formed’ was one of the heaviest in the
army, and prided itself on riding even closer knee to knee in the charge
than the regulation sanctions; and well was it for them that they did
so, for the odds against them were very heavy. The shock was perfectly
direct; the French wavered a little at the last moment, and the
Cuirassiers burst through them, maintaining their formation almost
intact; then, wheeling round, attacked the overlapping French squadrons,
and drove them back towards the hollow, where the second line of
Hussars, warned of what was happening in front, had taken ground
outwards, and then charged the _mêlée_ from the northwards, setting it
in motion again towards the south.

By degrees the forces began to disentangle themselves, and the Germans
rallied again in closed squadrons, while the French got away as best
they could towards the woods of Lambusart.

The losses due to the lance appear to have been trifling, for at the
moment of actual contact the men could not reach each other; the horses
fairly breasted one another, and the lighter ones went over backwards,
many being found with fractured spines. In the _mêlée_, too, the lance
proved useless,—the crowd was too dense. Men wrestled and fought with
their fists. The French loss caused by our artillery was perfectly
appalling; but, thanks to the dexterity of our leader, who managed
always to keep the enemy between him and the guns—thus effectually
masking their fire—we have escaped their shells almost entirely. I may
also call attention to the advantages we secured by having the sun at
our backs, which gave the French gunners—excellently trained as they
are, and gallant beyond a doubt—hardly the chance of inflicting injury
on us.

No one can accuse the French this morning of showing anything but
perfect gallantry, but we have again an instance that more than
gallantry is required for cavalry efficiency. The reason why the Germans
won is because they manœuvred with perfect precision, and were so
thoroughly in hand that even the most unexpected occurrences could be
met and dealt with. Here the French were outmatched, and their leader,
too, seemed hardly equal to his task. He formed line too soon; had he
stayed in squadron columns a little longer he could have changed front
without the unsteadiness entailed by the endeavour to do so after the
line had been formed.

Whilst writing this one of the General Staff has kindly come round to
tell me that there is room in a special train starting to-night in two
hours—destination not to be breathed—and I fancy within a very short
time you will hear of something startling; more I dare not say at
present.

My friends of this morning are back again safe and sound, having ridden
some sixty miles. They tell me the French had thirty-six squadrons
against our twenty-four this morning. But about the rest of their
information I must be silent.

                                           VOUZIERS, MIDNIGHT, _May 12_.

The curtain has at last fallen on the first act of this great national
tragedy—the first strategical problem has been solved, and I am again
free to write.

Briefly what has happened is this:

All the available troops of the Metz (or 3d Army) have been drawn off
under cover of the operations described in my telegram of the 5th inst.,
to the neighbourhood of Luxembourg—Thionville.

The five Corps of the 1st Army have been concentrated from Namur, and
districts northward, behind the frontier north of Mezieres, Sedan, and
the 2d Army (four Corps) has formed between them. Three other Corps are
following in rear.

These movements were completed on the 9th inst., and at daybreak on the
10th the frontier was crossed by the leading troops of all three armies.

Two French corps, distributed for the defence of the Meuse, were caught
by the 3d Army whilst endeavouring to concentrate, and compelled to fall
back in considerable confusion.

The Second Army met with no opposition, and their cavalry reached
Buzancy.

The cavalry divisions in advance of the First Army had a sharp and
victorious encounter with French horse on the plateau between the Meuse
and Aisne, who retreated afterwards towards Laon, and our leading corps
made good the passage of the Meuse, between Mezieres and Sedan, and
upstream towards Mouzon, their advance guards bivouacking on the line,
Rancourt—Omont—Poix. It was a day of hard marching, but the weather was
cool, and the men in good training seemed to make light of their twenty
to twenty-five miles.

I was not present at any of the collisions this day, being unable to
overtake the cavalry screen; from what I can learn, however, the success
of the latter was due to much the same reasons as in the fight at St.
Amand—Bry, viz., mobility in the troops, _coup d’œil_ in the leaders,
and closed files in the charge.

The fight of the next day I saw capitally, and send it herewith as I
wrote it the same evening.




                     ENGAGEMENT AT VAUX CHAMPAGNE.


                                                     DRICOURT, _May 11_.

I overtook the main body of our Cavalry Division (_i.e._ the one
attached to the immediately following Corps, with which I have for the
present joined fortunes) near Tourteron—a village lying some seven miles
north of the Aisne—late last night, and learnt that there was certain to
be a sharp tussle next morning; for patrols reported large masses of
French troops in the valley of the Aisne about Vouziers, and from a
neighbouring hill we could see the reflection of their bivouac fires,
while southward we heard the noise of trains passing constantly and at
short intervals on the line from Rheims to Monthois.

At 3 A.M. the headquarter orders reached us, and at 4.30 we were on the
move—pretty smart work, considering the number of hands through which
orders had to pass. I followed the General’s staff, who had kindly given
me permission to do so.

Our mission was evident, viz., to seize the high land beyond the Aisne,
to cover the passage of the stream by our infantry.

On the way reports came in that a large body of French troops, at least
a Corps, was moving to meet us by the same road, and it became evident
that it was a race between us who could reach the long stretching downs
of Vaux Champagne in our front first, and in sufficient strength to hold
them. That our cavalry could be there in time was clear; indeed, our
scouts were already far beyond it, but how to hold it was another
matter, about which I should have liked information, but did not dare to
ask for it.

We cantered forward, and drew up on the downs about 7.15. I found the
situation very much like one I saw at the French manœuvres last year
near Lesmont, when infantry and artillery, both without scouts in
advance, raced for a similar hill, and met at the top with results
disastrous for the artillery.

The ground was exactly similar, and deserves a word or two of
explanation. The downs of Vaux form, as it were, a _T_ piece to a long
central ridge. We were standing on the cross-head, and looking southward
a corresponding transverse ridge limited our vision at 2500 to 3000
yards, and between the two lay two valleys trending east and west from
the central neck, the slopes gentle and unbroken, with a slight
convexity in cross section. If we were ten minutes too late the infantry
would be in the hollows out of the line of sight of our batteries, and
our fate would be a matter of minutes.

We had only three batteries on the spot, and where were the others? I
did not know, and dared not ask, and as etiquette prevented my going in
front of the General, I had not the consolation of studying his face;
all I noticed was that he was smoking very quietly and reflectively.
Northward, a mist lay over the river, and all the valley was still; the
minutes seemed like hours. At length my ear caught the sound, so well
known to me, of the roll of gun-carriages and clatter of harness, and
out of the sea of mist below I suddenly saw the helmets and heads of the
gunners arise, and then I knew that, confident in the reports of the
cavalry, our General was going to try, and to succeed, in the same
manœuvre in which the French last year, without cavalry, had so
conspicuously failed; for these new comers could only be the Corps
Artillery, and with eighteen to twenty batteries in line on this height
in time, I felt certain no infantry could hope to capture it. The enemy,
however, was not far off, for isolated shots were now heard from the
southward, and our cavalry videttes came in view, falling back before
his advance.

Our guns were brought up behind the brow and unlimbered, but kept back
below the sky-line, and every one was ordered under cover, where we
waited for some ten minutes. Then suddenly the order was given to load
and run forward by hand. I crept to the front and there saw extending
half-way down the opposite slope the leading lines of a whole French
Division deployed for action. A more perfect target it would have been
impossible to devise. Next moment eighteen batteries at least were
pouring their fire into this defenceless mass, and the further hillside
became a scene of slaughter unequalled in the annals of warfare except,
possibly, at Eylau.

[Illustration:

  OUR CORRESPONDENT AT THE BATTLE OF VAUX CHAMPAGNE.
]

The guns were all laid for the leading line, there was no question of
ranging at all—for the distance was not more than 1200 yards—some of the
French threw themselves down and attempted to reply, but in a few
moments the smoke and dust from our bursting shells enveloped them, and
their bullets began to fly higher. The following lines pressed on to the
leading ones, thus making the target denser, and now the gunners changed
from shrapnel to common shell, with high explosive bursters, and we saw
limbs and trunks of men thrown high in the air above the dust-clouds,
whilst even the screams of the wounded reached us above the din. It was
ghastly beyond the power of description, and I dropped back to look the
other way, and there saw the whole of our Cavalry Division trotting
forward to reap the harvest the guns had sown.

They were at this moment in column of regiments, each regiment wheeled
up by troops, and moving perpendicularly to the prolongation of the
enemy’s line. I lost sight of them for a moment as I cut across the
hill, and when I next saw them they had wheeled into line and were
bearing down on the enemy obliquely across his front, so that six
successive lines were available to ride down all resistance. The first
two lines increased their squadron intervals, and opened their files to
about half a horse’s length, and then, at about 500 yards from the
enemy, the gallop was sounded. The outer sections of the French
endeavoured to wheel up to meet them, but a last salvo from the two
flank batteries with shrapnel seemed to tear them away, and the next
instant the cavalry were on them. For a moment the line was a bit
unsteadied, but its pace did not check. The French rose and fired after
them, and many fell, but the second line, 300 yards in rear of the
first, was on them, and then the third and fourth, and now I understood
why the German cavalry carry lances. The first line kept up its pace to
the end, and then rallied beyond it and came back through them again;
the fifth, not yet engaged, trotted round and charged in from the front,
and the sixth moved off up the hill to watch the flanks. The confusion
now defied description, the French firing like lunatics in every
direction, and the whole mass taking an uphill direction, thus masking
the fire of the French guns, which had been in action within a few
minutes of the commencement of our fire, and had replied pluckily to the
guns on our side specially reserved to deal with them; but now, in the
confusion, our lancers got amongst them and succeeded in destroying most
of the teams. It was 8 A.M. when the first gun fired, it was 8.20 when
the cavalry charged, and since then, perhaps, twenty minutes more had
elapsed—a whole Infantry Division had been destroyed. But our position
was by no means without cause for anxiety, nor could we hold the ground
we had won; we knew French reinforcements were at hand, for we heard
guns open on our cavalry beyond the hill, and these soon began falling
back in disorder.

What would we not have given for a brigade of Bersaglieri or of French
Chasseurs—I thought of one I had seen last autumn that marched nine
kilometres in forty-five minutes, and wished we had it with us now.

Our leading companies were still a couple of miles away; heading more to
the left, I moved along the ridge till I reached a point whence I could
overlook what was going to happen.

About two miles to the south-east I saw a French brigade with six
batteries of artillery, moving forward, formed for attack in their
conventional manner. The guns came into action to the eastward, and
almost at the same moment the Prussian divisional batteries also
unlimbered, but the French found their range first, and so occupied the
attention of the Germans that the infantry this time passed unscathed
down the same slope which, on the other flank, had proved so disastrous
to them. It was now evident, from the form of the ground, that the two
infantries would butt up against each other at about two hundred yards,
and victory would probably fall to the side which was quickest ‘on the
drop,’ as the Americans say. Both sides were rapidly approaching one
another, the Prussians still in line of company columns, the French in a
dense line of skirmishers. Presently the former ‘front formed line,’
their drums began to beat, and the whole advanced in ‘parade march,’
dressed as on the passing line. Suddenly, and simultaneously, the French
line dropped to the ground, the Prussians halted and came to the ready;
for a moment they stood motionless. Then the French, finding, I suppose,
that on the ground, they could not see, sprang to their feet, and that
instant there was a glint of light along the line as the rifles came to
the present, and the next second the scythe of death swept over the
French, and they fell in swathes. But the Prussians began to fall too,
and the French supports were closer at hand, and fed the fighting line
more rapidly, but their fire was not equally in hand. I could hear the
Prussian volleys and mark the course of each distinctly. For five
minutes the struggle raged—the roar of musketry was deafening—but above
it I again caught the beat of the drum, and saw the second Prussian line
advancing. When it was almost close on the first, the shrill whistles
sounded, the fire partially ceased, and, headed by their officers, the
whole sprang forward with a rush. But the French did not give; their
reserves, too, were close at hand in company columns; the fighting line
rallied on these, and all dashed forward together. But no bayonet
encounter followed. Both sides halted at about thirty paces, and again
the magazine fire blazed out, telling on the French clumps much more
rapidly than it did on the Prussian line—for a single bullet pierced ten
or a dozen bodies. Then presently the French masses became ragged
towards the rear—they bagged outwards like sacks, and began to move with
increasing speed down the hill, and at this moment two squadrons of
divisional cavalry, who had slipped out between the guns and the
infantry, swept down on them from flank to flank.

They probably did not do much damage, but they separated the
infantries—and a number of French batteries now appeared on the further
hill, and compelled the Prussians to fall back also.

The artillery duel now began again—but lasted only a short time, for the
French evidently only meant to break off the fight, and as soon as the
wreck of the infantry were in safety, the firing ceased, and the guns
withdrew.

The Germans were in no condition for immediate pursuit. They had to wait
for the remainder of the corps to close up, and to rally the cavalry.

It was now about 11.30—and to the eastward on the high ground
overlooking the Aisne about Vouziers we could see the flashes of a long
line of guns, and in the plain below dark masses of troops.

About four we moved forward, and about six bivouacked near a place
called Dricourt, whence I write this. I learn that our scouts discovered
a whole Corps moving down on our flank this morning from St. Remy, but
about 10 A.M., hearing presumably of the result of the action at Vaux,
they bent off southward, and are evidently now on our front. It appears
the French Corps we fought to-day came on with one division deployed for
action on its left, a brigade in echelon on the right. The corps
artillery between the two and the remaining brigade in reserve. Where
the cavalry was we do not know.

Another French corps was defeated about Vouziers. So we have the wreck
of two Corps, and the whole of one for certain, in our front for
to-morrow, for our outposts are in contact along the whole line. How
many more we may find I cannot tell, but we are two days clear ahead of
their calculated mobilisation, and these two days’ fighting must have
seriously deranged their plans.

The men are rather sober; they have seen death for the first time, and
the slaughter caused by our new shells is most horrible to look at.
Besides, only few of them were engaged in the actual fighting line, and
the remainder do not yet know from experience the intensity of the
passion for blood which seizes them when once they have taken active
part in the slaying.

It has been a wise measure to let the massed bands play to-night, and I
have never experienced anything more moving than the sound of the last
great hymn, sung by all the men, with which the ‘Zapfenstreich’ winds
up.




                        THE BATTLE OF MACHAULT.

                         GREAT GERMAN VICTORY.


          (_From our Special Correspondent with the Germans._)

                                                     DRICOURT, _May 11_.

The gunners were moving long before daylight, and I went with them. Dawn
was just breaking when we reached the summit of the rolling ridge which
marks our front, and we could still see signs of bivouac fires burnt low
on another and almost parallel wave some 2000 to 3000 yards to our
front. The bottom of the hollow is steeper and we cannot see into it,
but they tell me our Infantry are down there.

Our position faces N.N.W. by S.S.E., so again we shall have the sun at
our backs. Some of our guns are entrenched, and I notice the intervals
between them are wider than usual, probably, as before, to ward against
the melinite shells.

Of our strategic position all I know is that we have a Corps on either
flank, and two within supporting distance—what the 2d Army is doing I
don’t know.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                                     VOUZIERS, _May 12_.

I was obliged to break off my dispatch abruptly, owing to the sudden
development of events. I had just written the last line when the first
gun went off about ten minutes before sunrise, and for an hour an
incessant roar of artillery raged. The French shot well, but the sun in
their eyes gave them never a chance.

I had now time and daylight enough to look round. Our troops were all
carefully under cover at least 2000 yards to the rear, mostly in
rendezvous formations, waiting. Of the enemy I could only see his guns,
and when the sun rose high enough, one could distinctly make out the
line of an entrenchment just at the break of the long slope into the
hollow. Even then I might not have noticed it but for the indiscretion
of its occupants, who would keep moving about. It may have been about
six o’clock when I saw, out of the hollows away to the rear, three great
columns rise up, which proved to be six batteries of Artillery each.
They trotted forward, forming line to the front, and then I realised
that I was at length about to see a real Napoleonic battle, the blow to
pierce the centre or fail.

[Illustration:

  THE BATTLE OF MACHAULT: THE GERMAN CAVALRY CHARGING THE RALLYING
    SQUARES OF THE FRENCH.
]

Nearing the outer edge of the zone, where the splinters of bursting
shells meant for us began to be dangerous, the gallop was sounded, and
the whole eighteen batteries dashed forward in superb form. Our guns
increased their fire to the utmost extremity, shrouding the enemy’s
front in the smoke of their shells, and then ceased for a few moments as
the new arrivals passed through the intervals, resuming it again as soon
as they were clear, and maintaining it at this extreme rate till it was
seen that the others had unlimbered and were ready to take their part in
the action at a range of about 1500 yards. This move brought them,
however, to within 1000 yards of the enemy’s advanced Infantry, and we
saw many drop; but our own advanced posts had been reinforced by small
driblets, too insignificant to attract the enemy’s artillery fire, and
these with the aid of a few guns that could now be spared soon took the
edge off the French Infantry fire.

In fifteen minutes or less, the effect of these eighteen fresh batteries
was plainly apparent; to stay where they were meant for the French
gunners annihilation, and that was not their business, and presently we
saw their teams come up by alternate batteries. In the crowd of men and
horse thus assembled our shells made terrible havoc, and probably not
one-third of the guns were successfully withdrawn. Then the whole power
of our sixty batteries was turned on the Infantry, and we had the
‘defender’s dilemma’ before us. He could not retire his Infantry up the
slope, for that meant beginning the action with a retreat; and he could
not leave them there unsupported, for that would mean annihilation; his
only chance was to move troops down the slope to reinforce them—and
presently we saw them coming. Then a repetition of yesterday’s slaughter
began.

Had we known for certain what was going on out of our sight, we might
have been content to let the foe bleed himself to death in these
fruitless efforts; but we did not, we could only guess that he would be
moving forward his reinforcements of all arms with all haste, and our
game was to crush what was before us as quickly as might be.

Our Infantry were now rapidly coming up, the two divisions side by side,
the brigades of each in the same order, with their regiments each one
behind the other. The leading regiment had two battalions in first line
and one in support, and the foremost battalions, each two companies in
front and two behind, in company column. As the troops approached our
guns they formed line and came forward, their drums beating, with the
strictest possible discipline, for the bullets were flying in showers
overhead, and men were constantly dropping.

The lines went down the slope with about 500 paces between them, and as
the leading one reached the advanced posts, the latter rose, and, with a
cheer, dashed down into the hollow, where they found shelter for a
moment in the dead angle at the foot of the slope. Our gunners now
turned their fire on the Infantry trench for a few moments with high
explosive shells, and then the whole crowd of men in the hollow rose and
rushed it at the point of the bayonet, clearing it in a moment and
pursuing beyond. Then came the turn of the French, and gallantly they
availed themselves of it. Our rapid advance had masked our guns, the
French falling back before it had been taken up by their supports, and
now having only Infantry to deal with, the whole of them turned and came
on again.

It did not come to cold steel, however, for again both sides stopped and
blazed into each other with magazine fire and astounding inaccuracy. The
air above our heads seemed alive with bullets—but our reserves were
coming up under cover, and those of the French moving down hill caught
many of the missiles that flew too high. Soon, perhaps in five minutes,
the whole body, both assailants and defenders, began to move slowly up
the hill, the movement never ceasing till our Infantry reached the top.
Our Horse Artillery, followed by our Divisional Cavalry, galloped
forward in support. What happened for the next few minutes I am unable
to state from observation, for I, too, was moving across the valley, and
looking for a reasonably secure spot from which to see further. I found
one at the junction between two French Corps, where a copse came right
up to the edge of their line—both Corps being hotly engaged in front had
wheeled inwards a little towards the centre, and there was a gap of some
500 yards, and not a soul on the look-out. From here I could take in the
whole situation. To the south-eastward guns flashing and heavy masses of
troops showed the battle extended for miles beyond the left of our
corps, and south-west of us I saw at least thirty French batteries in
line along a low crest that ran about parallel to the ridge we had now
reached, whilst up the slope towards us, but from our left front, a
whole French Division of Infantry was moving towards their comrades on
the hill already hardly pressed, from whom they were yet about one
thousand yards distant.

Their guns were still silent, for their Infantry masked their view, and
it was fortunate for our battalions that they were so, for the fight for
the moment was stationary, and we were only just holding our own.

For some moments it continued so, and the effect to the spectator was
very curious. The air was so filled with the roar of musketry that it
seemed to come from nowhere in particular. There was nothing, in the
absence of all smoke, to connect it with these two long lines of men,
whose rifles spasmodically rose and fell. Along the front of the French,
owing, I suppose, to the angle at which I saw them, a row of little blue
sparks scintillated like the spark discharge from an electric brush, and
over both there lay a blue-grey mist which gave a curious mirage effect
to the whole. The shooting must have been vile on both sides, for
according to practice-ground results, thirty seconds should have
sufficed for mutual extermination; but, though men fell fast, the net
result appeared wonderfully small.

This may have lasted some three minutes, but it was impossible to keep
the run of the time, and then above the roll of the musketry I caught
the beat of the drums, and a reinforcing line, closed and in perfect
order, came over the brow to our assistance. The sight of these closed
lines was enough for both sides; the French gave way, and our fighting
line dashed forward. But only for some 300 yards or so, for again French
reinforcements brought the movement to a check. And now the French
Artillery opened fire on our following lines, and we had a taste of what
it means to come down hill in the sweep of shrapnel.

Our gunners were, however, quickly on the spot. They had been waiting
behind till room was made for them, but till they picked up the range
our losses were terrible, and I think that that following line must have
lost a larger percentage than any other troops this day.

The French fighting line was now sagging to the rear, and their last
reinforcement—a still intact division—was yet some 500 yards away from
them, when I noticed a couple of cavalry officers pass close to where I
stood in the copse, take in the whole scene at a glance, and gallop
away.

I knew then what was coming; it would be the death stroke if given in
time, before the fresh French Infantry had actually joined the fighting
line. These were now not 300 yards away from their comrades when the
first squadron passed me galloping straight down the hill in column of
troops. The first squadron no sooner had its last troop clear of our
Infantry front, than it wheeled into line, and went right at the flank
of the French, who attempted to fall back to meet it, but gave way at
the last moment and ran right back on the reinforcements, and pell-mell
fugitives and pursuers crashed right into the angle of these fresh
troops. The second squadron followed, then a third and fourth. The
confusion became indescribable, and now by the same track an endless
succession of squadrons began to emerge, for the first arrivals had been
only the Divisional regiment, and two whole fresh Cavalry Divisions were
now to follow. On the French side, too, a Cavalry Division appeared
coming out through the line of guns in line of squadron columns, and a
cavalry duel was now imminent.

There was not much time on our side to prepare for it. The first
regiment of the leading Division joined in the charge on the Infantry,
but that blow sufficed, and the whole mass began to break up and fall to
the rear with increasing velocity. The remaining squadrons, as they
arrived, formed line to the front, and awaited the arrival of their
fellows.

As soon as the 1st Division had completed its formation, it trotted
forward to meet the enemy, who were now only some 800 yards distant.
Both sides were suffering from Artillery fire, and there was no room for
manœuvre. The gallop and charge were sounded simultaneously, and the
shock took place all along the front; but the German files were not
closed as well as on former occasions, and the two lines fairly threaded
each other, then wheeled about by troops, and went for one another
again. Then a closed, locked, _mêlée_ arose, and the fight became
stationary. But our 2d Division was now rapidly arriving, and its
leading brigade delivered a shock which set the mass in motion towards
the French guns. Then another brigade was sent in, and this fairly
started it on the run, and in a few seconds the whole confused mob of
over 6000 horsemen was flying in wild confusion right down on and over
the gunners, who again tried to limber up, but were again too late.

The battle was over, the French line pierced, their last closed reserves
broken, and we had a brigade of Cavalry and masses of Infantry, who had
not yet pulled a trigger, in hand.

I looked at my watch, it was just 8 A.M., and I turned and rode for the
nearest wire. Crossing the ground over which we had come, I was able to
notice that our two divisions had both still a regiment in hand, and of
the following Corps only the Corps Artillery had been engaged, so we
were in ample strength for the pursuit.


                        THE LESSON OF THE FIGHT.

What the effect of this victory will be on the course of the war it is
too soon to prophesy. It may very well prove decisive, for we have now
driven a wedge right in between the French Armies, behind their eastern
and northern defences, and stand with five Corps on either face of the
wedge, with three more in between ready to move to the support of
either. The French must either move against us by lateral roads and
railways, in which case we can always meet them on a broader front, or
attempt to concentrate far away to the southward, and in any case our
strength is morally more than doubled by our successes. The Germans took
the field with no overweening opinion of themselves. They are a modest
people, as a whole, given to pessimism about themselves, and ready to
believe the overdone reports as to the regeneration of their hereditary
enemy that reached them through the public Press. The French, on the
other hand, had again learnt to believe in themselves; their
journalists, who were not going to do the fighting, had lauded them to
the skies, while the nation and rank and file had believed all they were
told, even if the experienced soldiers had not. They have fought with
the greatest gallantry, but for the second time it has been their want
of thoroughness that has ruined them. In each arm and every branch they
were just a little behind their adversaries. They lost two clear days in
mobilisation, and hence were strategically unready when the blow fell.
Their Cavalry was brave, but not a match for the Germans in mobility,
and consequently was beaten. The defeat of the Cavalry led the Infantry
to blunder into a trap where no human courage could avail them, and this
again entailed a concentration backward, with the obligation of standing
on the defensive to await the arrival of a reinforcing Corps which came
just too late; and the consequences we have seen in to-day’s fight. I do
not believe the Germans have lost very heavily, though isolated bodies
may certainly have done so. But the three arms played into each other’s
hands so perfectly, and the arrival of the supports was so well timed,
that none were ever called on for exertions beyond their strength. Such
tactical handling has never been seen since Napoleon’s days. But there
is this difference to note, that this time the troops have handled
themselves instead of being handled by the General.

It is too early yet for a list of casualties to have been made out, but
at the last moment I learn that our Cavalry yesterday lost 20 per cent.
of their strength.




          THE WAR IN THE FAR EAST—THE CAPTURE OF VLADIVOSTOCK.

                       DETAILS OF THE ENGAGEMENT.


A correspondent at Hong-Kong telegraphs under date July 18th as
follows:—

Every one is engaged in discussing what we shall do with Eastern
Siberia, now that we have got it. The fall of Vladivostock was so
sudden, and so apparently easy of accomplishment, that it almost seems
as if the Admiral, Sir Frederick Richards, and General Barker are likely
to lose the credit of the success which they themselves achieved.

It is known that the 1st Battalion Leinster Regiment, together with the
1st Battalion of the 4th Goorkhas, the 21st Bombay Rifles, another
Bombay regiment, and two batteries of Artillery, were dispatched to
Hong-Kong from India at the very beginning of the troubles, and that
they were joined there by 1000 of the finest men ever seen from
Australia, with distinct orders to the Admiral and the General at
Hong-Kong (who was given the military command) to operate against
Vladivostock.

The _Leander_ and _Mercury_ were instantly sent to the north to
reconnoitre, while the remainder of the squadron was brought to
Hong-Kong, it being understood that cruisers would be detached from the
East Indian and Australian stations to guard Singapore and the Straits.

Except two ships which claimed protection in the neutral waters of
Japan, it was known that all the Russian squadron had retired to
Vladivostock. Telegrams had further informed the Admiral that four ships
from the Pacific station had been ordered to Yokohama to wait his
orders.

It was frightful work getting the necessary armaments and stores on
board the transports, from the intense heat prevailing; but there was
much less sickness than might have been supposed, the new troops being
roomily housed on board the steamers which were to take them north, and
kept employed, except during the greatest heat, in assisting in all the
work of preparing and loading the transports. In rather over five weeks
everything was finished, and the _Archer_ and _Swift_ being left to
guard Hong-Kong in the event of any stray Russian cruiser appearing, the
remaining thirteen ships of the squadron, headed by the Admiral in the
_Imperieuse_, who had the General with him, and convoying fifteen or
sixteen transport, store, and collier steamers, sailed for Vladivostock.

The harbour of Vladivostock is one of the finest in the world. It lies
east and west, and is about two miles long in those directions, while it
is about half a mile wide from north to south. All over this fine space
there is a clear depth of from five to nine fathoms—precisely that of
greatest convenience for an anchorage. The town is situated at the
north-west angle of the harbour, and the latter is everywhere overlooked
by high ground, but especially from the south. The immediate entrance to
the harbour is by a passage a mile and a half long and three-quarters of
a mile wide, lying about N.N.E. and S.S.W., and opening into the west
part of the inner harbour. This passage is formed by a peninsula not
more than half a mile wide at any part, and more than three miles long.
It is generally high ground, rising in parts to 300 feet. The entrance
to Vladivostock is wholly covered by the large island of Kazakavitch,
which measures five or six miles either way, and contains in itself the
very fine and extended harbour of Novik Bay. The strait between this
island and the mainland, which must be entered to pass into Vladivostock
Harbour, narrows gradually, but with much indentation and many
anchorages, to the west entrance, formed between the Shkota Peninsula
before described, and the island. At this point it is only about
one-third of a mile wide, and the north shore is the end of a very
narrow, sandy spit, about a third of a mile long.

It was known that for years past the Russians had been erecting
batteries and placing mines to guard the approaches to their harbour,
and were there no other way of advancing to attack but by sea, up the
channel and into the harbour, no place is so easily defended. But as it
turned out, and is now recognised, no place is more difficult to defend
when attacked in the proper way. It is near the end of a peninsula
itself, and troops landed from anchorages at the heads of the two bays
which form the peninsula, can easily isolate and cut the town off from
the mainland, and so take it in the rear.

It was at first thought that our expedition would follow this plan of
attack, but the rendezvous made by signal immediately on leaving
Hong-Kong, namely, Novik Bay, set that question at rest.

It took the fleet ten days to reach Novik Bay, but, off Korsakov Island,
it was joined by the _Melpomene_, _Daphne_, _Champion_ and _Garnet_,
from the Pacific, and so made up to seventeen sail in all. A few hours
after, the _Leander_ and _Mercury_ rejoined, reporting that there was a
small garrison—perhaps 150 men—occupying the two batteries covering the
entrance to Novik Bay, and probably protecting a mine field, but no
other batteries or garrisons were known to be on the island. The ships
had been twice chased by four ships coming out of Vladivostock, but in
obedience to orders had not attempted to bring them to action, and had
easily out-steamed them each time.

The whole squadron now lay-to off the entrance to the bay, while 500 men
of the Sutherland Highlanders were landed south of the entrance with
directions to capture the southern battery, assisted by the fire of the
_Leander_ and _Mercury_, and to turn the guns on the northern battery,
also assisted by the ships.

This turned out to be a very small affair. The Russians taken in rear
and engaged in front, fled into the forest long before our troops
closed; and the northern battery, seeing what had happened, fired one or
two shots from the very light guns which the battery contained, spiked
them, and retired. The cables to the mines were discovered and cut, and
within four hours afterwards the whole armament was safely anchored in
Novik Bay.

The next two days were entirely occupied in filling up with coal from
two colliers, and settling the final arrangements for attack. The
Admiral himself, taking the General with him, hoisted his flag in the
_Alacrity_, and ran up the west shore of the Shkota Peninsula, drawing
the fire of a small battery at its south end, and of one or two heavier
ones at the back of the town.

On the third day, all was astir at daylight. Most of the boats of the
squadron were alongside the transports, and troops to the number of
nearly 3000 were crowded into them, besides the field-pieces of the
ships, and their crews. The steam launches and pinnaces soon took lines
of these loaded boats in tow, and steamed out of the bay, whence five or
six of the war ships had preceded them. In a very few minutes these
latter were engaging the little battery on the end of Cape Tokarofski,
as the low sandy spit is called, which made but a very feeble reply, and
soon hoisted a white flag. There were only twenty men in it, and three
small guns, so that resistance would have been hopeless. It was
ascertained to be the mine station for a line of mines across the
Strait.

The plan of attack was now cleverly developed. The landing was effected
all along the west shore of the Shkota Peninsula, and in spite of the
rough scrub with which it is covered, the seamen dragged the
field-pieces along the shore to the north. No resistance was offered; it
was impossible to offer any under the guns of the ships, and by noon the
whole body were halted for dinner.

There is a valley about half-way along the peninsula lying about N.E.
and S.W., opening on to the harbour at the northern end, and on to the
sea at the southern end. It was supposed that resistance would be
encountered here, though it was not intended to march through it, but to
adhere to the shore and the cover of the ships until the town could be
turned.

Accordingly, after dinner the advanced guard had no sooner opened this
valley than it was met by a heavy rifle and gun fire from a strong
detachment posted and entrenched across the head of it. But the General
was not to be caught napping. He had sent four field-pieces up the hill
on his right, which from its brow poured a wholly unexpected and
murderous fire down upon the Russians. This they did not stand for ten
minutes, and our march went on. Then the field-pieces on this height
found themselves overlooking the harbour, and at once turned their
attention to shelling the ships in it, though the distance was too great
to admit of effective fire.

[Illustration:

  THE TAKING OF VLADIVOSTOCK: GOORKAS PROTECTING THE GUNS.
]

At this time the ships, ten or twelve of them, spread themselves in a
long line ahead of the advancing column, and searched every foot of
ground, which could be easily done as it was generally low.

There were several batteries discovered facing seaward, which the ships
engaged. The Russians stuck to their guns most manfully, and some of our
ships suffered very heavily, but none of the batteries had any efficient
rear defences, and as the gunners caught sight of the head of our column
advancing by the shore, they invariably abandoned their works and
retired to the northward, along the road that leads round that part of
the harbour.

Fearing an attempt might be made to dislodge the field-pieces on the
height, a wing of the Goorkhas was sent up to reinforce them, and it was
quite a sight to see these little fellows swarming up like so many ants.

And now the signallers with the field-pieces got to the highest point of
ground, and very soon telegraphed to the Admiral that the ships might
shell the Russian troops by firing on the signal station, which the
troops surrounded. Some of the ships could see the station, and in
obedience to signal from the Admiral began to shell it. The signallers
directed the fire from the ships, so that, without seeing the object, it
was immensely destructive, and ultimately forced the Russians to
retreat.

This being again communicated to the ships and to the landing party now
mustering in strength at the back of the town, a general advance was
made, before which the Russians fell back, and ultimately sent in a flag
of truce with terms of surrender.

Our loss was very small; only one officer of the Bombay Regiment, and 42
men killed; 5 officers and 134 men wounded. Nor was the Russian loss
much greater, being estimated at 67 killed and 203 wounded. It was the
skill of the attack in turning the Russian defences, and the immense use
that was made of the fire from the ships, which produced a result
astonishing to those who had not inquired into its causes.




                     EVENTS IN THE EAST OF EUROPE.

                   THE BELEAGUERED GARRISON IN VARNA.


                                                      LONDON, _June 11_.

The course of events in the Black Sea, since our fleet for the time
evacuated it, has been as follows:—It appears that as soon as the
Russian Fleet was driven off the sea into harbour, immediate steps were
taken by the Russian authorities to withdraw the troops which had been
gathered for the purpose of reinforcing the troops already landed in
Bulgaria. Unable to pass by sea they were useless for that purpose; and
it was hoped, if they were sent off at once to reinforce the armies
opposing Austria, that a successful action against that Power might
enable the victorious army, co-operating with the army already in
Bulgaria, to make the passage through Roumania by land and, at least,
ensure the safety of the expeditionary force in Bulgaria. Perhaps it
might be possible in that case to secure the object, dear to the heart
of the Czar, of so strengthening that expeditionary force as to enable
it to crush the Bulgarian Army. The deepest anxiety prevailed in Russia
as to the fate of those troops, somewhat rashly committed to the sea
expedition, no sufficient allowance having been made for the prompt
action of the English Fleet.

It was some time before the Russian Fleet, which had retired to
Sebastopol, discovered that the English Fleet had actually evacuated the
Black Sea. Sir George Tryon had left some cruisers as long as possible
to disguise the movement. When these also disappeared, a fear was
entertained that this was a mere ruse to draw the Russian Fleet away
from Sebastopol in order to crush it in the open sea. We regret to say
that it was through the telegraphic dispatches to the English newspapers
that, by various indirect channels, the news first reached the Russian
Government that Trebizonde had been evacuated and, subsequently, that
the English Fleet had passed into the Mediterranean. It was, however,
not till Sir George Tryon had actually reached Malta that they were
fully aware that the Black Sea had been evacuated. Then it was, after a
day of hesitation as to the best course to be pursued, decided to
establish touch with the Russian Army in Bulgaria, all communication
with which had been cut for some time. As, however, that army—not
without difficulty—had maintained its telegraphic communication with the
sea, this was effected soon after the cruisers had reached the coast, in
the neighbourhood of Varna.

It was then ascertained that the Bulgarian force in Varna itself was
still holding out; and that the Russian Army, reduced to about 35,000
men by the force left to guard the lines to the sea, by the covering
force at Varna and Shumla, and by sickness, had been able to effect very
little. It had at first advanced inland as far as Tirnova, where it
remained in an entrenched camp, waiting for information. It was believed
that the Austrian force in Servia had been too much reduced to be able
to advance, and that the Bulgarian troops were fully occupied in
Macedonia. Had the force landed been carried up to the figure that was
intended, an immediate advance on Sofia would have been attempted. As
the case stood, however, General Karanoff did not feel himself strong
enough for this, and as now his only hope was to have the way through
Roumania opened, he had turned northwards, having sent messengers
through to communicate by land with Russia. He had, however, found it
impossible to effect the passage of the Danube up to the moment when he
received the joyful telegram announcing that, in consequence of the
departure of the English Fleet, it was possible either to withdraw him
by sea in safety, or to reinforce him. As there seemed every prospect
that a great success might yet be achieved, if the force originally
intended could now be landed in Bulgaria, the cruiser carried back
proposals to that effect. Meanwhile, however, much time had been lost.
The greater part of the Russian troops had been sent inland by train
from the sea-board. Though they were at once reembarked on all available
lines, very little had been done more than preparing for embarkation at
Odessa, Sebastopol, and other ports, when the news of the Battle of
Sardinia created a sudden alarm that the Black Sea would not long be a
safe place for Russian ships. For the next ten days tremendous efforts
were made to hurry the embarkation of the troops, but by the end of that
time news reached the Russians that large numbers of English cruisers
had already appeared in the Black Sea.




            ARRIVAL OF BRITISH TROOPS IN THE SEA OF MARMORA.

                    LORD WOLSELEY IN CONSTANTINOPLE.


News of the dispatch of the reinforcements to the Mediterranean Fleet,
announced by our naval correspondent a fortnight ago, had reached the
Russian Government, unfortunately again through the enterprise of some
English correspondents, whose information was telegraphed _viâ_ New
York, and thence by a route not as yet clearly traced to some Russian
agents, who managed to get it to their Government very rapidly. It was
therefore taken for granted that the cruisers would be promptly followed
by such ships as Admiral Tryon could spare. When then the first of
Admiral Markham’s line-of-battle ships appeared, the Russian Fleet,
afraid of being caught whilst involved in assisting in the transport of
the troops and stores to Varna, once more retired, part to Odessa, and
part to Sebastopol. Our own cruisers immediately re-occupied the
littoral of Bulgaria near Varna. They were successful in capturing one
of the transports that was attempting to escape. We have been favoured
with these particulars, which have been gathered from the prisoners
captured on this transport. As far as can be ascertained the
reinforcements landed on this occasion have, in consequence of the
delays recorded, not exceeded 15,000 or 20,000 men. Nearly all of them
are reported to have marched to join General Karanoff who is supposed to
be between the Danube and Tirnova, at which point he is expected to
effect his junction with the reinforcements.

[Illustration:

  BRITISH TRANSPORTS PASSING THE DARDANELLES—FORT CHANAK SALUTING THE
    ENGLISH SHIPS.
]

The greatest alarm exists at Sofia. The Bulgarian troops are still much
involved in the Macedonian campaign, and, though as many as possible
have been recalled for the defence of the capital, it was feared that,
with the sea open, the Russians would be able to pour in irresistible
numbers. And, though that danger is now over, if General Karanoff has
once more under his hands an effective force of 60,000 men, or nearly
so, it is believed that he may yet make a bold dash for the capital. The
moment the news of the Battle of Sardinia reached Spain, Sir Evelyn
Wood’s troops,—which had been held in readiness to sail at two hours’
notice from Cadiz and Gibraltar,—passed eastwards. The news reached
Alexandria and Cyprus on the same day. Embarkation was very rapid at
Alexandria. The garrison there had been largely reinforced in order to
facilitate embarkation, in consequence of the difficulties of keeping a
large fleet of transports for a long time in the open roadstead at
Famagousta. The whole of the Army of Occupation will be temporarily
employed on the Eastern expedition. Sir Francis Grenfell has announced
his confidence that he will be able, for the time the war lasts, to
ensure the safety of Egypt, provided that, should any serious movement
be threatened by the Mahdi, he is supported by a certain number of
native troops from India. This has been provided for. Within twenty-four
hours ten thousand troops in all were ready to sail from Alexandria. On
the other hand, progress at Cyprus has been much slower. The wind not
having been favourable for some days, a large part of the transports
were obliged to put to sea; and when the embarkation began, the
difficulties of embarking were very serious.

Every one in the island is groaning over the fact that nothing has been
done to develop the splendid old harbour of Famagousta during our
occupation. However, the first of the transports were ready to sail in a
day or two. As it was necessary to await the arrival of Admiral
Markham’s Fleet, or, at least, of the cruisers, before passing out of
the Sea of Marmora, the ships sailed as they were ready, and the
rendezvous was formed after passing the Dardanelles. The first troopers
to arrive in the Sea of Marmora were those from Alexandria. These were
followed immediately by about 5000 men from Malta, who had been detained
there when the alarm due to the French Declaration of War caused the
check to the expedition. The garrison has, like that of Gibraltar, been
reduced to a very low ebb, and will be made up by the Militia regiments,
who have most patriotically volunteered for service in the Mediterranean
garrisons. A portion of the troopers from Cyprus followed; but as soon
as they had entered the Sea of Marmora, Admiral Markham’s battle-ships
passed through. The cruisers sent on to protect the movement had already
entered the Black Sea, and been followed by those from Admiral Markham’s
Fleet.

Sir Evelyn Wood’s force from Gibraltar and Cadiz, rather less than eight
days from thence, arrived before nearly the whole of the force from
Cyprus had come in. On the tenth day after the battle of Sardinia—that
is, on June 4, the fleet of transports, headed by Sir Evelyn Wood’s
troopers, began the entry into the Black Sea. At the moment we write, we
hear that the whole of the transports carrying all the troops, except
the half Corps originally detained in England, have been lost to sight
from land, sailing east. As soon (as was recorded in our issue of May
28th) as the seven battle-ships and cruisers from the Baltic were known
to be on their way to England, the remaining half Corps was embarked
from the home ports, and the entire fleet, with the troopers, reached
Gibraltar about forty-eight hours after Sir Evelyn Wood had sailed. The
troopers have accordingly now entered the Sea of Marmora, and will, no
doubt, follow the rest of the fleet.

[Illustration:

  THE SULTAN, LORD WOLSELEY, AND SIR CLARE FORD WATCHING THE PASSAGE OF
    THE BRITISH FLEET THROUGH THE BOSPHORUS FROM THE STEPS OF THE DOLMA
    BAGHTCHE PALACE.
]

Lord Wolseley has been in Constantinople for some time. He was there in
telegraphic communication with all the different bodies of troops and
with England. He was more conveniently able to obtain fresh information
from all quarters, and to be in communication with our Ambassador and
the Porte. He watched from Dolma Baghtche the magnificent sight of the
passage of our fleet and troopers towards the Black Sea. Admiral Markham
embarked in the Ambassador’s yacht, after a long conference with Lord
Wolseley, and followed up his own fleet; but we learn that just before
the first troopers of the detachment from England began to pass the
Dardanelles, the yacht returned, and Lord Wolseley embarked in it,
leaving sealed orders for the detachment from England. We hear that Lord
Wolseley talks much of the advantages of a campaign in Asia Minor, and
that actually Trebizonde has again been occupied by an advanced
detachment. Moukhtar Pacha, having been largely reinforced, is still
holding his own very well on that side. Further than that we know as yet
nothing of the nature of the future campaign. Another week will,
however, no doubt throw much light on the subject.




                         FEELING IN AUSTRALIA.

                    PROPOSAL TO SEIZE NEW CALEDONIA.


     (_From our Special Correspondent, Mr. David Christie Murray._)

                                                    MELBOURNE, _June 2_.

The _Age_ and the _Argus_ of this day’s date publish the results of
several interviews. I wire you a synopsis of the ten newspaper columns
which feed the curiosity of Australian readers. Lord Hopetoun and Lord
Jersey are essentially and quite naturally non-committal. They unite in
declaring that, so far, the Colonial attitude and action have the full
approval of the Home Government, but they both decline to lend
countenance to the combined action of the Governments of Victoria and
New South Wales. Mr. Justice Windeyer, of Sydney, and Mr. Justice Way,
of Adelaide, are at one in the opinion that, France and England being at
open warfare, the Australian Fleet may at once be legitimately employed
in operations against the enemy without leave obtained from the Home
Government.

Sir Thomas M‘Ilwraith exults in the prospect of the fulfilment of his
life-long dream. He, more than any other Colonial statesman, has been
interested in the preservation of purely British influence in the
Southern Hemisphere, and he sees in the present European conflict a
certain promise that the blundering ineptitude of Lord Derby and his
successors will be finally rendered harmless. The fact that England is
fighting shoulder to shoulder with Germany will, Sir Thomas thinks,
facilitate a friendly exchange by means of which the north-eastern
portion of New Guinea may be brought under the dominion of the British
Crown. He insists, with some vehemence, on the undoubted fact, that if
his own policy had not been obstructed by the Home authorities, the
northern waters of these seas would have been given over to the
undivided empire of Great Britain, and he urges strongly the
advisability of seizing the present moment to undo the blunders of the
past. He approves warmly of the combined action of New South Wales and
Victoria, and declares that their proposal to seize New Caledonia is not
merely statesmanlike and patriotic, but could hardly have been avoided
in the circumstances.

In New South Wales Sir Henry Parkes and the Hon. Mr. Dibbs sink, for
once, all party differences, and the venerable Leader of the Opposition
supports the action of the Government as warmly as if it had been taken
at his own initiative. Here, in Melbourne, the Government and Opposition
are, in quite as pronounced a fashion, at one with each other. In short,
outside the Governors, whose official position condemns them to
neutrality, there is not a dissentient voice to be heard. New Caledonia
has long been a thorn in the Australian side. It is only 700 miles from
the coast of Queensland, and the northern colony and its parent
neighbour have long since tired of being overrun by escaped French
convicts of the vilest type. You, in England, have little conception of
the resentment which is inspired in the breasts of the most loyal
Australians by the supineness and folly which allowed the Home
Government to sit idly by whilst a French penal settlement was
established so near our shores. Australia complains, and complains with
justice, that she has been treated from the first as a reservoir into
which might be poured the most abominable draff of English society. It
was bad enough, and more than bad enough, to be compelled to receive the
refuse of the Home Country. But when the escapes from New Caledonia
began to be so numerous as to prove a decided nuisance, the indignation
of the public was naturally aroused. Whatever you may think of us in
England, we Australians are, at least, a patient and enduring people. We
have made mild demonstrations in the way of departmental remonstrance,
and have done nothing more. Had we been stronger than we are we should
long since have made the presence of the French Government in New
Caledonia a _casus belli_.

The Mother Country is so indifferent to our aspirations and our needs,
that she has never given herself the trouble to recognise the gravity of
this special cause of complaint. At least 300 cases of escape from New
Caledonia to Australian shores are known and recorded. In the case of
the ‘exiles’ we naturally rejoice. We have given home and a glad welcome
to that distinguished artist, M. Henri, who was banished from his native
France for his political opinions, and who has now achieved for himself
a perfectly unique position in Australian art. There is, assuredly, not
one man in the Australian Continent who would willingly have put an
obstacle in the way of escape of M. Henri Rochefort. It is not men of
this type to whose presence in our neighbourhood we object. But it is
undeniable that the French criminals who now people New Caledonia, are
men of the most abominable of all conceivable types. The grievance—the
true grievance—is not merely that the French Government should have been
allowed to defile our neighbourhood by the deportation of these people,
but that they should positively have determined to perpetuate the race.
How many people in England are aware of the shameful and stupid fact
that the French Government, having massed its most awful male outcasts
in New Caledonia, deliberately sent out to them female convicts of the
most abandoned type in order that the men might marry and reproduce
their own likeness? The mere incidental question of bigamy by government
authority need scarcely be considered. Amongst the women sent out were
parricides, simple murdresses, and creatures soiled by all the crimes of
which nature is capable. One of the brides had murdered both her father
and her mother, and another, on the outward voyage, threw her own baby
out of a port-hole. The sires of the future French settlement were, of
course, worthy of their partners, and one may fairly ask what could
possibly be expected of a race so founded. I have myself spoken with
Englishmen upon this question, and have been met with a laugh, a shrug
of the shoulders, and an allusion to an ancient proverb about a pot and
kettle. It is undeniable that Hobart Town and Botany Bay welcomed in
their time a great deal of human evil, but it never came unalloyed, and
an examination of facts will teach any inquirer that a good fifty per
cent. of the so-called crimes for which men and women were expatriated,
were no more than the ebullitions of an impatient patriotism, or the
escapades of unguided youth. Leaving that aside, nobody pretends that
the Australian population of three and a half millions is seriously
tainted. We are troubled by certain forms of rowdyism and brutality, and
we have a dangerous class rooted amongst us. That a great law-abiding
population should be handicapped in that way by the past action of the
Mother Country was hard enough to bear in all conscience, but that
England should have sat supine whilst a foreign power doubled, trebled,
and quadrupled, the curse upon our borders is intolerable.

We Anglo-Saxons are everywhere a long-suffering and rather stupid
people. Australia herself has been somewhat to blame for her own partial
acquiescence in this injustice, and there are vast numbers of her
inhabitants who know little and care less about the question. The
Australian citizen who had suffered from the inroads of a gang of
foreign desperadoes has a sympathetic interest in the matter, but he is
only one in ten thousand, and the fact is that we have been far too
tame.

The distance between New Caledonia and Australia is, as I have said
already, about 700 miles. That between the Sandwich Islands and the
United States is about 2000 miles. But those islands are directly under
American control, and the United States have always held that the
presence of a foreign power there would have to be regarded as a menace.
Just as she warned away France from Mexico, she would now warn away any
foreign intruder in the South Seas. It is easy to conceive that England
herself might have been equally wise. The French treatment of the
Canaques, whom they dispossessed when they took forcible possession of
the island, has been wrong-headed in the extreme. They have had the
absurdest panics about impossible native risings, and have sent out
numberless expeditions to destroy the food supplies of the wretched
natives. Things are quieter now, and the Canaques are effectively cowed.

It was decided last night by telegraphic communication between the
Premiers of Victoria and New South Wales, that the two leading Colonies
should jointly invite Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia,
and Tasmania to lend their authority for the immediate dispatch of the
Australian squadron to Noumea. An intimation of the fact has been sent
to the Home Government, but no permission has been asked. It is not in
the least likely that England will interfere with us at such a moment,
and on such a question, but even if she did, the question is one so
vitally affecting the destinies of Australia that we should be compelled
to take the matter into our own hands.


                      LORD CHARLES SCOTT OBJECTS.

                                                               _June 6._

There is a rumour abroad to the effect that Admiral Lord Charles Scott
has put his veto on the dispatch of the fleet until such time as
instructions can be received from England, but though this report has
been angrily seized upon by the populace, no credence whatever appears
to be attached to it in quarters where the most trustworthy information
might naturally be looked for. It has served, however, to enliven the
city to a very remarkable extent, and the mere hint of opposition to the
popular will has created a widespread excitement, and has made it
evident that the men of the colonies are bent on having their own way.
Collins Street and Bourke Street are patrolled by vast bands, who groan
loudly at the name of the Admiral and cheer the local leaders of public
opinion. It is quite a fortuitous occurrence that the various bodies of
Melbourne cadets had arranged to march with their bands through the
principal streets this evening, but the event has given colour and stir
to the _al fresco_ entertainment provided by the populace for their own
delectation. Special editions of the evening papers confirm the rumoured
action of the Admiral, and the excitement is growing to fever heat. Lord
Charles Scott’s position is that the squadron of which he holds command
is intended for defensive purposes only, and cannot be legitimately
employed in offensive operations without the direct sanction of the war
authorities at home. He is likely to be technically in the right, but
the fact that England and France are already actively engaged is
generally held here, amongst the most moderate men, to abrogate this
rule, and to make it the immediate and obvious duty of Australia to take
her place in action. In the meantime, so the Sydney telegrams inform us,
the squadron now lying in the harbour there is making every preparation
for active service, and it is entirely probable that, after all, no real
delay may ensue.




                    INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE ADMIRALTY.

                      DEPARTURE OF THE EXPEDITION.


                                                               MIDNIGHT.

After all, there will be no waiting. A telegraphic dispatch has been
received from the Admiralty, and the instructions are that the squadron
shall take instant action. A special train to Sydney has been chartered
by the Premier. He will be accompanied by three or four members of the
Ministry, and I have succeeded in attaching myself to the party. The
train starts in an hour.

                                                               _June 7._

The Ministerial train has broken the record, and at four o’clock the
Ministerial party is steaming across the beautiful harbour towards the
flagship. Driving hurriedly through the streets of the city, we have had
time to see no more than that the main thoroughfares are gay with
bunting, though the streets themselves are empty. The whole population
has turned out to witness the departure of the squadron, and from the
deck of the launch a crowd of many scores of thousands is visible about
Lady Macquarrie’s Chair. The great harbour is thronged with every kind
of craft. All the merchant ships are gaily decorated everywhere. The
weather is heavenly, and the harbour, with its sparkling waters and
majestic lines of headland, can rarely have been seen to more advantage.
The spirit of the people is evidently and entirely in the enterprise on
which they have embarked. The four ships of the Australian squadron lie
in sight of the vast crowd, and are already volleying clouds of smoke.
As I lift my eyes from the note-book in which I am rapidly scrawling
these lines, I can see that the great hulk of the flagship has begun to
move. Flash goes a gun from her black side, and a hundred rolling echoes
bellow from the surrounding heights. The crowd sends back a
heart-stirring cheer, and a gun from the fort responds to the Admiral’s
salute. Vessel after vessel salutes, and the fort answers each in turn.
Like leviathans afloat move our bulwarks on the brine, a score of times
huger than when Campbell sung the prowess of the British arms at sea.
Before we can reach the flagship they are all well under weigh, and
forging grandly towards the open waters. Aboard some of the yachts and
launches are brass bands, not all of the finest quality. They play ‘God
save the Queen’ in all manner of keys and in different times. The result
is not what one might fancy, for everybody seems to find it wildly
exhilarating. The cheers from the immense concourse near Government
House grow fainter and fainter as we recede, and at last die away
altogether. There is a fresh breeze in the open, and a roughish sea, and
so in a while even the most enthusiastic of the pursuers are willing to
turn back again. The spectacle is over. The squadron has steamed away,
and Australia stands ready to strike her first blow in the cause of the
British race in the seas of the Southern Hemisphere.




             THE FRANCO-GERMAN CAMPAIGN—THE GERMAN ADVANCE.

               RENEWED FIGHTING—ROUT OF THE FRENCH ARMY.


          (_From our Special Correspondent with the Germans._)

                                                      SUIPPES, _May 19_.

A whole week has passed and we have not moved. Our cavalry and most of
my Corps are enjoying the hospitality of the French barracks at the camp
of Chalons, horribly dirty, still, better than a bivouac in the pouring
rain we have been enduring. Our officers’ patrols go daily south of
Chalons-sur-Marne and eastward to Bar-le-Duc.

Rheims is observed—practically invested—for our scouts tear up the
railways leading to it from Paris as fast as the enemy can lay them down
again, and further to the westward patrols are in touch with the French
Army of the North, and we learn that troops are daily being moved by
rail to the southward, which corroborates other information that they
are again going to try on us Bourbaki’s stroke of 1870, and, under the
circumstances, it is about the best thing they can do.

In our rear the Reserve Divisions are working day and night to complete
our road and railway communications with the Namur-Luxembourg Railway,
and as everything has been foreseen to the smallest detail years in
advance—even the girders for bridges made and kept in stock—and the
country, moreover, presents no serious difficulties (certainly none to
frighten our engineers of Afghanistan experience, and the Germans are
but little behind us), I have no doubt that our halt here will be but of
short duration; indeed, some of the roads are evidently through already,
for our Reserve ammunition waggons came up yesterday. The line through
Mezières-Givet is also expected to be open in a day or two, and then our
siege train will be able to take the works of Rheims under fire in
earnest. This delay, I need hardly say, is very much against the
feelings of our Hotspurs, and I have listened to many an oration from
young subalterns to prove how differently old Moltke would have led
them. With due deference, I think it can be shown from his own works
that he would have done nothing of the kind. His own saying was that the
art of war was only the practical application of principles to the
attainment of the end in view—viz., the subjugation of the enemy to your
will—at what knowledge of the circumstances shows you to be at the
moment the cheapest possible cost to the country.

In 1870, with a vast numerical superiority, no fortifications to speak
of on the enemy’s side, and no allies on his own, the principle of
extermination by a series of battles was the best policy to adopt. How,
against almost equal numbers, backed by fortresses not to be
despised—the first victory having been won and the fighting value of our
troops thereby doubled—our best game is not to break our heads against
the enemy’s strong places, but in a central position to await his
offensive returns and move out to meet him—not stand to be attacked—as
soon as his plans are sufficiently indicated by our cavalry outposts.

It was a wise stroke on the part of the enemy to lead off with a first
blow from Russia; but we countered it by the immediate assumption of the
offensive, which enabled us to score first blood against France. For the
present we can await the decision in Russia in comparative security.

The troops are not idle meanwhile. After a day’s rest and the
reorganisation of the regiments in consequence of losses—which, by the
way, amount to only 10 per cent. in the Corps engaged—they were at work
again drilling with the same intensity of purpose as if the spring
inspections and not a battle lay before them. That was a lesson they
learnt from the last war—viz., that the command of men in the squadron
or company is personal property, and cannot be handed over like charge
of the quartermaster’s store. A leader must know his men, and they must
know him by actual contact on the parade ground if the full fighting
worth is to be got out of the men.

                                                                 11 P.M.

News of our victory at Alexandrovo has just come in. That will set free
a couple of Corps at least for this, the _decisive_ theatre. If only
they had our Midland and North-Western traffic managers!

                                              SUIPPES, _May 25_, 10 P.M.

We move at 5 A.M. to-morrow, direction Bar-le-Duc—_i.e._ S.E.

                                     HEITH LE MAURUPT, _May 27_, 10 P.M.

Another most decisive victory for the Germans. Censor will not allow any
more.

                                      CAMP OF CHALONS, _May 31_, 10 A.M.

Another victory; now I may tell you all that has happened in the order
in which it occurred. As I had anticipated, the French have again tried
Bourbaki’s move, with much the same results. As far as we can learn,
three Corps were transferred from the line of the northern fortresses,
by Paris—Lyons, and the whole of their Army of the East moved northward
to meet us, their right on the line of their eastern defences.

Our 2d Army moved up both banks of the Aisne to meet them, it was
theoretically wrong, no doubt, but we could not help it. The 3d passed
troops over the Meuse, to form on their left, and we—_i.e._ the
1st—detached three Corps to reinforce the right, leaving two ‘field’
Corps and a number of Reserve Divisions (I understand six) to hold the
Army of the North in check, and retire slowly before it if seriously
attacked.

My Corps rendezvoused on the 26th at 4 A.M. around Suippes. The country
had been thoroughly reconnoitred, and, guided by officers of the
Topographical Staff, all combatant branches moved straight across
country, in the good old Napoleonic method, trains and Corps Artillery
only by the roads. The rain had ceased, and the going was fairly good;
anyway, we all agreed that it was infinitely preferable work to stewing
in dusty lanes in closed columns, with never a breath of fresh air, even
though in the bottoms the soil was somewhat heavy. The men were in the
best of spirits at the start—reviving the good old march to Sedan joke,
‘Mit Armen links schwenkt! Gerade aus’—but the sun came out, and by 5
P.M., when we had covered nearly twenty miles as the crow flies, faces
began to look drawn and weary. Then we caught the sound of the guns in
front, and the men stepped out again briskly.

About 6.30 we got the order to halt and bivouac; fortunately we were
close to some ponds and a stream. Our cavalry had this time come little
into conflict with the enemy, but after driving in a few patrols had
come on the French infantry, practically deployed for action, heading a
little west of north, and had not attempted to make any impression.
Indeed, there was no reason why they should, for they could see
everything perfectly from some neighbouring ridges, and so had fulfilled
their duties. We, at least, knew where the enemy was, and he did not
know where we were. So far we had the advantage.

The fight began with a race for the ridges. We had no particular
advantage, and a scrimmaging fight began at once all along the line. Our
artillery was in great part neutralised; so was that of the other side.
It simply became a struggle of endurance—the Germans, relying on the
superior discipline of their men, could afford to feed the fighting line
more slowly (_i.e._ with greater distance between the following lines),
and thanks to the perfection of their Staff, trained to work as nearly
as possible under wartime conditions, the mechanism of the feed worked
with less friction and more certainty; fresh troops were always
forthcoming when they were required. On the other side the machinery
wanted lubricating, owing to their radically defective conception of the
nature of the infantry fight, which induced them to move to the attack
in a succession of extended lines following one another too quickly;
their strength melted away almost before they reached the actual
fighting line, and then the Staff failed to send support quickly enough.
It was soon evident that they were bleeding to exhaustion more rapidly
than we were.

Thus hour by hour our attack pressed home like waves of an incoming
tide, and from a distance the effect was most curious to watch. Two long
undulating lines—a light blue haze hanging over them—each seemed to be
backed by some elastic force; as the equilibrium at one point was
disturbed, one line recoiled and the other pressed forward till flanking
fire brought it again to a stop for the moment.

By noon the edge of the high ground overlooking the valley, through
which runs the Rhine-Marne Canal, was reached, and now the flood was
running strong in our favour. Then we could see, too, how these
disturbances in the equilibrium of the two lines were occasioned. The
smaller units of the French thought too much of their flanks, too little
of their centre. Thus, where two battalions or companies touched, the
men balled up and crowded together, offering a better target; then the
fire from the centre relaxed, and the moment the pressure of the enemy’s
fire gave way, the Germans dashed forward to fill up the vacuum. Soon,
too, the French endeavoured to bring up their reserves in column, for
their men would no longer advance in extended order; and now the small
calibre rifle and its great penetration justified its existence; I had
not thought much of it before. But the employment of columns induced a
new feature—viz., a tendency in the larger units (_e.g._ divisions) to
close on their centre—and presently before our eyes we saw a great gap
opening out behind the enemy’s fighting line. The time for the final
blow was close at hand. Our gunners, coming up under cover of the hills,
were crushing the artillery of the enemy out in the plain, and had some
attention to spare for his reserves. I saw a cavalry aide-de-camp leave
the Staff of the Army Commander, who was close at hand, and I made
tracks as fast as I could for some broken ground, where I hoped to be
safe from the coming storm.

Twenty minutes afterwards, heading straight for the gap I described
above, came at least eight squadrons in line at a gallop. Their ground
scouts yelled at their own infantry in front to lie down, and they
mostly did so. The cavalry checked for a moment at them, as if at a
fence, and then swept down on the infantry in front, not two hundred
yards distant, rode over and beyond them, wheeled outwards, and bore
down on the reserves. As they passed our infantry, the latter threw
themselves into groups to let the second line of cavalry—which still
remained in squadron columns—through, and then four more lines of
cavalry followed, and the whole plain became a sea of dust and
confusion. Our infantry rallied into company columns, and dashed forward
with the bayonet in pursuit, and we had the last tableau of Waterloo
over again. The canal and the stream in the hollow put a stop to our
advance, and fresh infantry with the pioneer companies moved forward to
make good the crossing, which might have been a troublesome business
enough, had not the troops to our left—_i.e._ west—already carried the
passages at Revigny.

Darkness was now rapidly coming on, and the fight here died away. I rode
back to the rear, and found food and a welcome with the Headquarters of
our third Corps, which had only just reached the ground and had not been
engaged.

About five next morning the troops again stood to their arms, but in the
night news of an advance of the French Army of the north had come in,
and we began to retrace our steps over the same ground already
traversed. As we were starting, intelligence of the British victory in
the Mediterranean arrived, and with it rumours of Communistic
disturbances in Paris. I was also told that two Corps had been detached
from the 2d Army from near St. Menehould, and two more from the Russian
frontier had arrived about Pont-a-Mousson, and with the four Bavarian
reserve divisions were preparing to strike the French Army of the west
in their right flank. At night we reached the line of the great road
Chalons-sur-Marne—St. Menehould, and about 4 P.M. fell right on the
flank of a French corps moving from Epernay on the Camp of Chalons. Part
of the Corps from St. Menehould marching by Suippes was on our right,
and together we drove the French back in some disorder into the complex
of hilly ground about Moronvilliers, cutting them off from Rheims.

The Corps left to watch this latter place had fallen back fighting
the previous day, and lay along the road from Suippes by
Somme-puis-Attigny—_i.e._ about north and south.

At daybreak we advanced again, and soon a struggle began which, in the
hilly, wooded ground we now were in, utterly defies description. As
before, it was mainly decided by superior endurance of loss and a
better-trained Staff. Of tactical combination there was none on a large
scale, but divisional artillery and cavalry suffered heavily in
endeavouring to support their comrades of the infantry.

We reached the culminating point of the plateau after five hours’
successive fighting, but the exhaustion of our men was extreme; hundreds
dropped unable to go a step further, and we afterwards picked up at
least an equal number of French in the same condition. Indeed, during
the last hours of the afternoon, it had become a struggle of the
survival of the fittest. The French fought with a determination they
never before displayed—probably because the ground, by giving scope to
our cavalry on previous occasions, never gave them the opportunity.

But this time every copse and bush gave them the chance to rally, and
many are the instances recounted of how superior officers on the French
side emulated the example of Ney in the retreat from Russia, and rifle
in hand stood to the last.

The battle was actually decided by a blow delivered some six miles to
the north, where the ground did give our three arms a chance of
co-operation, and about 6 P.M. the resistance in front of us gave way
altogether. The fighting broke off, and the men lay on their arms where
they stood, too weary to move another step.

During the night, however, a cavalry division belonging to the 2d
Army—which had moved round our rear while the action was going on—beat
up the bivouacs of the French, falling first on the artillery and some
cavalry and stampeding their horses, who took flight right down the
extent of the line. And this last blow turned the French retreat into
rout. It was York’s manœuvre at Laon, in 1814, over again, only more
thoroughly carried out.

[Illustration:

  GERMAN CAVALRY ATTACK BY NIGHT ON THE FRENCH BIVOUACS.
]

Our Corps were too weary to follow, but the one next on our right, which
had been squeezed out of line by our converging movement the day before,
took up the pursuit before daybreak in the direction of Rethel.




            ADVANCE OF THE SECOND AND THIRD ARMIES ON PARIS.


                       THE BOMBARDMENT OF RHEIMS.

                                                 WARMERIVILLE, _June 6_.

The general situation is as follows:—On the eastern wing the Germans
eventually made some 30,000 prisoners, and drove the wreck of the Army
of the East into Epinal and Belfort.

Leaving three Corps and the Bavarian reserve divisions to watch them—the
remainder of the second and third Armies are moving by the valley of the
Marne on Paris, their advance guards to-day reaching Epernay. The
available troops of the western wing drove the enemy before them
northwards into Laon and against the Belgian frontier, making 40,000
prisoners; but at least 60,000 are known to have escaped by rail into
Paris.

Rheims has been closely invested—my Corps, which lost 25 per cent. in
the last action, is in reserve round and about the village from which I
write. The light siege-train arrived here to-day, and the remainder is
expected shortly.


                           RIOTING IN RHEIMS.

                                                      RHEIMS, _June 14_.

The siege-train arrived here complete on the night of the 10th, on the
11th it was put in battery; and at daybreak next morning opened fire
against the three forts, Brimont, Fresnes, and Berru. It was just the
same here as before Verdun; within a few hours our converging fire from
covered positions knocked the forts to pieces, and the French guns were
buried in the _débris_ of their own parapets. Some of their guns, firing
by indirect laying, remained unsilenced; on the other hand, their fire
hit nothing to speak of. The advantage of smokeless powder, combined
with indirect laying, turned entirely in favour of the attack.

At daybreak on the 12th we moved forward to the attack of the
intermediate positions—not against the forts themselves, for these were
mere mudheaps, so saturated with the carbonic oxide due to the explosion
of our gun-cotton shells that they were equally untenable by friend or
foe.

The fight presented no special features of interest. It was noticeable,
however, how much the _morale_ of the other side had been shaken, and
how devastating is the power of 40 and 60 lb. shrapnel fire. The hills
on which Berru and Brimont stand were both in our hands by about noon.
Fresnes was surrounded, and surrendered shortly after. We could pursue
down the slopes with fire only, for Rheims itself was still protected by
hasty entrenchments which, as the sun was beginning to decline, it was
hardly possible to see.

[Illustration:

  SCENE IN THE STREETS OF RHEIMS: GERMAN TROOPS CLEARING THE STREETS OF
    FRENCH RIOTERS.
]

During the night the light siege-train was put in battery on the
captured heights, and our outposts reported sounds of firing and tumult
in the town, and, indeed, scarcely had our guns opened fire next morning
when the white flag flew out from the Cathedral tower; and about 10 A.M.
we marched in as peacemakers, for a number of territorialists and armed
workmen had broken out in the night, shot the Commandant, and began to
plunder the inhabitants, and as all discipline was at an end the second
in command yielded to the pressure of the inhabitants and consented to
surrender. We cleared the streets without much difficulty, the rioters
bolting like hares as we entered them; and the good people of Rheims,
remembering the good behaviour of the troops in ’70, welcomed us as
friends rather than enemies.




                   THE MARCH UPON THE FRENCH CAPITAL.

              THE REVOLUTION IN PARIS—ARMISTICE DECLARED.


                                                       MEAUX, _June 21_.

After a day’s rest we marched to Dormans, and thence down the valley of
the Marne, through the most lovely scenery. At every halting place,
fresh news of Anarchistic trouble in Paris reaches us, and I fancy the
end cannot now be far off, everything depends on the time our engineers
and railway troops take to restore the communications, and I have seen
no single case of injury which will require more than three days at the
outside to make practicable.

                                                       CLAYE, _June 27_.

At daybreak this morning, after a preliminary bombardment of twenty-four
hours, the position between the forts of Vaujours and Chelles was
stormed. The effect of the bombardment was just what it had been before
Rheims, and we left the forts untouched. The garrisons had taken shelter
in the bomb-proofs, and at first refused to come out; but seeing
themselves completely surrounded, and as the deadly fumes of our
bursting shells began to penetrate into their retreat, they at last came
out and laid down their arms, seeing the impossibility of further
resistance.

The line between the two forts was closed with every resource of field
fortification; but they proved of no avail, and only gave a fresh
illustration of the old saying, related of a British soldier in the
Crimean days, who, when taunted by a superior officer with being afraid
of the Russian trenches, replied, ‘It ain’t the —— mud heaps, it’s the
—— that stands behind!’

The line depended on the forts for flank defence, and when these were
silenced, the struggle degenerated into a purely frontal one, in which
the immense superiority of our fire in accuracy told. It was, perhaps,
in its commencement, the nearest approach to an ideal skirmishing fight
we have yet had. Covered by the fire of every available heavy
gun—maintained to the last moment possible—our skirmishers crept in to
within the edge of the obstacles and entanglements, potting every
Frenchman as he showed his head, so that the working parties who
followed immediately behind could cut the wires, etc., at their leisure.
In places dense lines of abattis could not be thus easily dealt with,
but the value of these fell when once the flanks were turned; and when
the troops told off for the actual storm broke cover there was
practically nothing in front to stop them. We carried the place almost
at the first rush; then ensued many long hours of wood fighting, and at
the fall of night our outposts finally held the line, Dugny, Le Bourget,
Raincy, Neuilly. Many of the officers had been there before. We are now
within easy bombarding range of the city.

As I write a report comes in that great fires are raging in Paris. This
cannot be caused by our shells.

                                                CLAYE, _June 28_, 9 P.M.

All firing has ceased at the outposts. A report is current that a
_parlementaire_ with a white flag has come in, and an armistice is
looked on as certain.

                                                                  LATER.

The report is confirmed. An insurrection has broken out in the city; the
Government is deposed, and some members of it massacred. We are moving
forward to the line of the old forts which will be given up to set free
the garrisons to act against the Commune, and from them we hold the
whole city at our mercy.




                     BRITISH CAMPAIGN IN BULGARIA.

                    DECISIVE DEFEAT OF THE RUSSIANS.


                                                                 LONDON.

At length we have great news to report from the British Army. A great
battle has been fought and won. Nay, more—the whole Russian Army in
Bulgaria, caught like rats in a trap, has, after two days of fierce
fighting, laid down its arms. It will be seen, therefore, that the
British Army has, after all, not turned up in Asia Minor, but in
Bulgaria. All the rumours and apparent demonstrations which led to the
belief that a great campaign in Asia Minor was intended, were merely
designed to distract attention from the real objects of the expedition.
Those who are familiar with Lord Wolseley’s methods now profess to have
been always made suspicious by the fact that, as we reported in our
issue of June 4th, he had been talking a great deal of the advantages of
a campaign in Asia Minor. They say that it is notorious that he holds
strongly to the belief that what is supposed in your own army to be
about to happen will soon be believed by the enemy. He succeeded in this
way in imposing on Arabi so completely during the ’82 campaign, that
(extraordinary as it may appear) the Egyptian leader was a prisoner in
Ceylon, when he was for the first time made acquainted with the great
movement of the English expedition from Alexandria to Ismalia. Lord
Wolseley then succeeded in deceiving Arabi because he had imposed upon
the world at large, although precisely in a similar manner he had, by
spreading reports of a call from Captain Glover during the Ashantee
campaign, managed to embark his troops for the surprise of the coast
towns from which the Ashantees were drawing their supplies, without any
one suspecting the direction in which he was going to strike. The former
ruse had been forgotten, and caused no suspicion as to the second. If we
may judge by the comments of our contemporaries on the reports which
have been hitherto furnished of the war, they have been either very
discreet and loyal, or have been completely bamboozled. And yet it was
tolerably plain that the direction in which an English Army could at the
moment be most effectively employed was in clearing Bulgaria of the
aggressive force of Russians, which, from the peculiar circumstances of
the case, she had not force to dispose of alone.

Seeing that it is immediately in behalf of Bulgaria, and only
secondarily in behalf of Turkey, because of the support she had offered
to Bulgaria, that we were engaged in the struggle, there was,
independently of the military advantages of the movement, an important
political object to be gained by exercising our strength at once in
support of the gallant Bulgarian forces. Even if it had been altogether
politically convenient to allow the Turkish Army to enter Bulgaria and
move upon Tirnova and Shumla, the material obstacles in the way were
very serious. On the other hand, twenty-four hours’ easy steaming would
bring our troops to the place at which the Russians had originally
landed. It was almost certain that as soon as the Russian General found
that our ships had again cut his communications by sea, he would abandon
his attempt to move upon Sofia and endeavour to make good his retreat by
the Dobrudja. From Kavarna we could easily cut across such a movement,
which it was to be hoped that the Roumanians would endeavour to delay by
every means in their power. It appears that Lord Wolseley, all the time
that he was at Constantinople, was in full and direct communication with
the Bulgarian Generals, and that all movements were concerted in
connection with them; while the Roumanians, assured of English support
both by sea and land, were ready to do their utmost to hamper the
Russian movements should any attempt be made, either from north or
south, to force the passage of the Dobrudja.

Without entering into further details, it will be sufficient to say that
Lord Wolseley’s delay at Constantinople was mainly in order to receive
the very latest reports from Bulgaria as to the exact position and
movements of the Russian Army. From the nearest point on the coast to
which telegraphic communication has been carried from Constantinople
swift dispatch boats were to bring off the cypher messages, either to
the fleet or to Kavarna, whence, as the army advanced inland, the news
would be carried. A second line of communication was also established by
way of Kustenjeh and Bucharest. Thus the General had the great advantage
of knowing more precisely than would usually be the case what the exact
movements of his enemy were. To a certain extent those movements were
tied. Detachments of too large force to be left to take their fate had
been placed to watch Shumla and Varna. From the reports which reached
Lord Wolseley, it was clear that the Russians having broken up their
camp at Tirnova were marching by way of Shumla—either intending to call
in their detachment from Varna and move from Shumla direct upon the
Dobrudja, or to advance upon Varna.

In either case, an immediate landing at Kavarna would apparently be out
of reach of any serious disturbance from the Russian forces until the
landing was effected, and was extremely likely to tempt the Russians to
move to attack us in that position. In that case, if we were only able
to hold our own in a position already examined and surveyed, it was
probable that our force would be amply sufficient to deal with the
Russians, even alone, and that within forty-eight hours the Bulgarians
who had undertaken to hang closely upon the Russian rear, might be
expected to arrive and make the position of the Russians impossible.

Immediately after the ships had passed out of sight of land, the whole
fleet changed its course to the N.-N.-West—and by mid-day following that
on which the fleet had left the Bosphorus the greater portion of it was
in the bay which extends from Kaliakra Cape towards Varna.

The landing had already been begun before our Correspondent arrived—but
he was fortunate enough to be allowed to join Colonel French’s Hussars,
who were landed soon after it was ascertained that the debarkation of
the troops would meet with no immediate resistance. This regiment was
pushed southwards, supported by a body of mounted infantry under Colonel
Hutton, the second day after the arrival of the troops, and as soon as
possible a couple of Horse Artillery guns, which were accompanied by
Colonel Marshall, with a small cavalry escort were sent after them in
support. The orders for the cavalry were to ascertain the condition of
affairs at Varna; if possible to capture a few prisoners, and, taking
advantage of the friendliness of the inhabitants, to endeavour to obtain
reports of the movements of the enemy.




                       THE BOMBARDMENT OF VARNA.

                            AERIAL WARFARE.


Our Correspondent’s description of this march is most interesting and
graphic, but we must abridge it in order to come to greater events. It
will be sufficient to say that they ascertained that the Russian
headquarters had arrived near Shumla without having had any news of the
landing of the English Army. The Russian Army was moving on Varna. The
Varna force had, however, evidently received orders to make an attempt,
if possible, to induce the town to surrender. Just as the cavalry
arrived on distant hills within sight of the town, they saw a balloon
hanging over it. This at first gave them some anxiety lest their
movements might be watched, and their position discovered. In a short
time, however, they had reason to perceive that the balloon was there
for a very different purpose. A sight, as our Correspondent describes
it, at once appalling and magnificent met their view. A black mass of
some kind was seen to drop from the balloon; as it about reached the
level of the tallest buildings in the place it suddenly burst into a
lurid glare which lighted up the minarets and pinnacles of the old
Turkish town. Its course was marked by crashing buildings and falling
ruins. It was evidently a dynamite shell of vast proportions, which had
been deliberately dropped from the balloon.

The object could only have been to terrorise the inhabitants by a cruel
and wanton destruction of property. If it had chanced on a magazine it
might have produced some effect upon the defence. As it was, it could
and did produce none. It indicated to the Englishmen who watched it,
rather the parting attempt of Russian hopelessness than a serious effort
of war. Nevertheless, a tremendous cannonade was simultaneously opened
from all the works near the town, and was not put an end to until some
of our ships, which had maintained communication with the garrison,
closed in, to within range of the works, and though at a considerable
distance threw such a mass of shells against the Russian field-guns that
they were glad to cease their fire and withdraw.

We give in our Correspondent’s words the next scene. ‘Not so, however,
the balloon. To our amazement we saw it deliberately change its course
over the town and steer in teeth of the wind, which was at the time a
comparatively light breeze setting seawards. As it reached the position
which it was evidently seeking—nearly over the magazines of Varna—we
again saw another shell drop out of the balloon, and as it burst on
reaching the buildings, what seemed like a universal conflagration of
all that part of the town, accompanied by frightful detonations and
explosions, showed the effect it had produced.

‘Colonel Marshall was standing next me at the moment, and exclaimed,
“Good God! I will tell you what it is; I remember hearing, just before I
left England, from an engineer named Delmard, that the French were in
possession of a war balloon capable of being steered backwards and
forwards even against a light wind, and that they had an arrangement by
which a particular form of shell, with a steel casing and some
arrangement of liquid oxygen and blasting gelatine, could be dropped
from the balloon. They expected great results from it, and must
evidently, as a special favour to the Russians, have sent this specimen
of the thing over to them.”

‘The evening sun had long set in the direction of Shumla. A crescent
moon had risen, and some brilliant stars shone in the sky. As we looked
over the undulating ground which separated us from the burning town, the
flames lighted up the ships in the offing to the east, making a picture
difficult indeed adequately to represent.

‘One thing, however, was clear to us, that the attention of the force
round Varna would be entirely occupied by the attempt to take advantage
of the destruction they had produced, which, disastrous as it was for
the inhabitants, did not seem likely, as far as we could judge, to
enforce any surrender.

‘The cavalry, finding themselves not observed, maintained their position
for the following day, sending scouting parties in all directions, and
reporting to headquarters.

‘This was the evening of the third day since the debarkation had begun.
Another cavalry regiment, with the remainder of the Horse Artillery
battery, had been sent up to support us; and early the following morning
Lord Wolseley, with several of his Staff, including Sir Baker Russell,
who is in command of the Cavalry Division, joined us. About 6 A.M. I was
looking down over the plain, when I saw two Bulgarian peasants
apparently in fierce altercation, coming up towards the position where
we were, escorted by one of the Hussars, who was vainly endeavouring to
make himself intelligible to them. Presently they came in, one of them
holding up a letter in his hand. One of the interpreters with Lord
Wolseley in a short time made out their story. It appeared that a
Russian officer, who had missed his way, had been seized and murdered by
the villagers in the place to which these two men belonged. One of the
Hussars had found them in possession of certain property of this
officer, and had noticed that a bag of letters was part of it. Being an
intelligent fellow, he had managed to make them understand that they
should accompany him to Colonel French. The letter the man was holding
up proved to be one of no importance, but it was only intended as an
indication of the purpose for which he had come. His companion had what
was evidently an officer’s sabretash, and on this being opened, several
letters were found in it, evidently dispatched from the Russian
headquarters to the commandant of the force before Varna. It informed
him of the fact that the English troops, which were reported to have
entered the Black Sea, were believed in Russia at the latest news to
have all gone on towards Trebizonde. It informed him further that the
Russian General proposed to make a direct march to the Dobrudja, and
gave him the different halting points on the march. It informed him of
the point at which he was to join the march, and told him that the
greater part of the Cossacks and the remainder of the Russian cavalry
would be required to watch the Bulgarian force, which, though inferior
to the Russians, and at some marches distant, might be expected to
follow up their retreat. It would therefore be necessary for the rather
considerable cavalry force which was attached to the troops at Varna to
protect the right flank, and to watch the advance of the main army when
it arrived. Without troubling your readers with the very ample
information which this dispatch conveyed, I may say generally that the
period at which the Russian Army, marching in two columns along two
roads at some distance from one another, would arrive at about the level
of Kosluji with its left column, was still about four days off. All this
information we received later. At the moment I saw Lord Wolseley
carefully reading through the translation of the dispatches as it was
put into his hands.

‘Admiral Markham had ridden out with the party, and the first person to
whom Lord Wolseley turned, after he finished, was the Admiral. A short
discussion took place between them, the nature of which I did not at the
moment hear, but which I have reason to believe related to the question
of the amount of transport and supplies that could be landed in the next
day or two. At all events, it was evident to all of us in a very short
time that the plans had been changed. Orders were immediately issued for
the march that afternoon of the three brigades which had first landed;
fortunately they were in the neighbourhood of Baltjik, so that they were
the nearest to Varna. The Cavalry, with the mounted Infantry, were at
once brought up, and extended so as to cut off all communication between
the main Russian Army and Varna.

‘Fortunately the country in this neighbourhood consists of a series of
undulating uplands, with numbers of features permitting the concealment
of large bodies of men.’

To tell the story as we now know it from various sources, the
opportunity which presented itself to Lord Wolseley’s mind as he read
the intercepted dispatch was just this. It was evident from the
information brought in by the Bulgarians, and from other sources, that
the Russians were still ignorant that an English force had landed in the
country. If he could immediately surprise the camp at Varna, he would
have at least a highly probable opportunity of breaking in upon the
Russian columns on their march, and annihilating one before the other
could come to its support; especially seeing that they were relying upon
the Cavalry of the Varna force to cover their movements. This was a far
more brilliant opportunity than that which had been at first hoped for
when the taking up a position, which would oblige the Russians to
attack, had been designed. The intention was for the three Infantry
brigades to move up that night in two marches into a position within
reach of attack of the Russian camp at Varna, and actually to make the
attack at grey dawn on the following morning.

Lord Charles Beresford was, according to arrangement, to land in the
evening with no particular attempt at concealment with a party of Blue
Jackets and Marines, and to arrange with the Bulgarian Officer in
command at Varna, for a sally of the whole Bulgarian garrison so as to
attract the attention of the Russians towards the Varna side at the
moment when our attack was made. Watches having been carefully compared,
three o’clock in the morning was fixed upon as the hour for the
simultaneous attack. The three brigades were to attack respectively the
right, left, and centre of the Russian position.

A powerful force of Artillery was kept back about two miles from Varna
in a favourable position in order to give support to our troops in the
event of any disaster. But it was to be a pure Infantry attack, not a
gun was to be fired, unless any of our troops were forced to retreat.
The sole duty of the Cavalry was to cut off fugitives and prevent any
knowledge of what had happened from reaching the Russian General.

We have reason to believe that some of the inhabitants brought off by
the fleet had supplied Lord Wolseley with most accurate information as
to the nature of the ground in the neighbourhood of the Russian camp,
and that this had given him considerable confidence in arranging the
details of the attack. Sir Evelyn Wood had charge of the whole of the
actual attack, and very great advantage was found to arise from the
practice in night marching which had been carried out under his orders
at Aldershot.

It cannot, however, be said that the fighting on this occasion was a
very severe trial for our troops. The British Army had to all intents
and purposes dropped from the clouds upon the Russians before they were
aware of its arrival. No very serious preparations had been made to
resist attack from the north since there was no reason to anticipate
troops coming from that side. The surprise the following morning was
complete. That is to say, not that the Russians were caught in their
beds, but that the English troops fully organised and ready for the
attack were upon them, and into their lines, before the Russians had
been able to prepare any organised resistance.

Only on one side, where an active Russian General had cautiously
entangled the front of his position with obstacles, was the right
brigade checked for a time, and, though some losses were occasioned
here, the general effect of the attack on all sides of the Russian
position, and the numerous places in which the works had been entered
made it impossible for the troops who had resisted the attack of the
right Brigade to hold out for any length of time. The Russians fought
most gallantly, yet showed very little power of acting for themselves in
a case where superior orders could not reach them.




                       ROUT OF THE RUSSIAN ARMY.

                          THE RELIEF OF VARNA.


By noon the whole of the works were in our hands, and as the Cavalry
intercepted all who attempted to make their escape, the Mounted Infantry
holding all such places as were inconvenient for the Cavalry, we had
every reason to believe that no one had escaped to tell the tale. The
slaughter on neither side was very great, the Russian position being,
from the beginning, so obviously hopeless, greatly outnumbered and
surprised as they were, that nearly 10,000 men laid down their arms. The
prisoners were the following day embarked for Constantinople,
considerable supplies and very valuable transport waggons, horses, and
mules fell into our hands. To make assurance doubly sure, Lord Wolseley
had brought up a fourth of Sir Evelyn Wood’s brigades nearly to the
position occupied by the batteries. Meantime, on the same morning that
the fight was going on, nearly the whole of the remainder of the force
had marched to occupy the high lands which overlook the two roads
leading up from Kosluji and Varna upon Bazardjik.

It was evident that, assuming the march of the Russians to be carried
out in accordance with the captured dispatch, the two Russian columns
would, during a certain period of their march, be not only some ten
miles apart, but be separated by some very difficult country. And,
moreover, that as the roads converged towards Bazardjik, an English
force occupying the uplands would have its two portions much closer
together than the advancing Russians. A valuable capture of the papers
of the Russian General in command at Varna showed that a duplicate of
the intercepted dispatch had reached him the previous day. Apparently a
reply had been prepared, but none as yet sent off. This indicated the
movements he was intending to adopt in order to join the main force. As
it had been ascertained that Kosluji, though not as yet in the
possession of the Russians, was in telegraphic communication with the
Russian headquarters, it was resolved to repair the telegraph, which had
only been cut by the peasants between Kosluji and Varna. As soon as this
was done a telegraphic dispatch was sent through in the Russian cypher
to the General commanding, ‘Yours of the 10th, Cavalry will be pushed on
to cover right flank, and advance of army on Bazardjik. The Infantry and
Artillery will join rear of column after the right column has passed the
junction.’ The British forces were now distributed as follows: Of the
Duke of Connaught’s Corps, the right division occupied the high ground
which the road from Kosluji towards Bazardjik crosses shortly after
passing Kosluji. The second division similarly occupied the high ground
above the Varna-Bazardjik road. The Artillery of the entire army was
concentrated on the high ground in such a way as to be able to bring its
fire upon the columns debouching from the roads. The whole of Sir Evelyn
Wood’s Corps lay in a position between Varna and the high ground, ready
to attack the right column as soon as its march should be sufficiently
developed to give an opportunity. Advantage had been taken of the number
of captured Russian uniforms in the camp at Varna to put up dummy
sentries, so as to leave the impression from a distance that Varna
encampment and neighbourhood was still held by the Russians. The whole
of the ground over which the fight was likely to take place was
carefully reconnoitred beforehand. On the morning of June 14th the
Russian right column, which, having a considerably longer march to
perform, moved off first, had arrived at the point where the road turns
sharply to the north leading towards Bazardjik, when a party of
Cossacks, who had been sent on to communicate with the cavalry from
Varna, which was supposed to be before them on the road, galloped in and
reported that they had been stopped on the road in crossing the
mountains by finding that the path was blocked with some felled trees
and abattis. Supposing this to be the work of some Bulgarian insurgents,
the General ordered forward a battalion of Infantry and a couple of
guns, and allowed the column to resume the march. Shortly afterwards
some Cossacks who had moved towards Varna rode up to some supposed
friends in Russian uniform, were captured, and not allowed to return. No
alarm therefore was excited on this side. As, however, the battalion of
Infantry moved up to the abattis in order to remove it, they were fired
upon by unseen foes, and many of them fell. A brigade was now ordered to
advance and clear the ground. As it moved forward within close range of
the hills it, too, was received with Infantry fire from unseen foes.




                         THE BATTLE OF KOSLUJI.

                       ROUT OF THE RUSSIAN ARMY.


The dispatch from our Correspondent of June 18th, published last week,
stopped abruptly at the moment of describing how the column of Russians
was advancing into the ambush cleverly laid for them by Lord Wolseley.
In the following dispatch he continues the narrative:—

As yet not a shot had been fired by the artillery or by any of Sir
Evelyn Wood’s troops, whose position was absolutely unknown. The column
was now halted in considerable confusion.

The General commanding the Russian brigade, uncertain as to what he had
in front of him, did not like to commit himself to an attack without
previous preparation by artillery, and asked to have some artillery sent
him. Six batteries were brought out in succession from the column on the
road at a gallop, and began to shell the heights.

Uncertain as to what they were firing at, they produced very little
effect, and none of the guns on the hills replied to them. Meantime the
column on the road was in the greatest confusion. A fresh brigade was,
however, gradually formed out of it, and moved up towards the right of
the road. A third brigade was to be seen also moving up in support of
the other two. As the right brigade moved up in successive lines towards
the heights, its right came within easy range of the position in which,
concealed behind a long line of under-feature, Sir Evelyn Wood’s
advanced division lay. When the rear of the brigade had fairly passed
beyond his left, a withering volley, followed by magazine fire, was
poured into it from the whole line of the division.

Staggered by the unexpected blow, the brigade fell into confusion. Sir
Evelyn, seizing the moment, advanced the whole division, having given
orders beforehand that the men should be kept in hand as much as
possible; and that instead of a skirmishing attack, which was quite
unnecessary under the circumstances, lines at least of companies should
be kept together as much as possible.

The Russian brigade, though taken in rear as well as flank, endeavoured
for a moment to present a front in the new direction. As they did so the
guns from the high ground for the first time opened, tearing through the
Russian ranks in all directions. Under the double storm, taken in flank
whichever way they turned, the brigade gave way, and was followed
closely by the leading division of Sir Evelyn’s Corps.

The Russian brigade next on the left began immediately to attempt to dig
in order to form a rallying point for the flying brigade, but,
overwhelmed by the fugitives, fired into from the heights, and pressed
by the pursuing division, they too broke, and carried confusion amongst
the guns.

The whole of the troops that had debouched from the road were now little
better than a confused mass, unable to act with effect, and suffering
appallingly from the cross fire directed upon them by Sir Evelyn’s
troops and those on the hill, whose fire was now continually increasing
in intensity.

[Illustration:

  THE BATTLE OF KOSLUJI: SIR EVELYN WOOD’S ATTACK ON THE RUSSIAN FORCES.
]

The remainder of the Corps, with little space to deploy, and whelmed by
the mass of fugitives, was huddled back upon the road. At this moment a
pre-concerted signal from Lord Wolseley directed Sir Baker Russell, who
with the whole of the cavalry, less Colonel French’s regiment which was
on the extreme right, had been placed near Varna to the left of Sir
Evelyn’s force, to charge into the confused mass which now represented
the right corps of the Russian Army. Enormous numbers of prisoners were
taken, and sent back promptly to Varna to be embarked on board ship.
Meantime the left Corps of the Russian Army had begun its advance along
the other road towards Bazardjik, but before it approached the heights
the news of the disaster which had befallen the right corps reached the
General. Though at first his intention had been to attempt to out-flank
the position opposed to him on the English right, in order to relieve
the pressure on his own right, the rapid progress of the disaster of the
right made him change his determination. With his intact Corps he took
up a position to cover the retreat of the remnants of the broken Corps.
Practically only one English division, besides the cavalry, had been
seriously engaged. From the nature of the case the losses had been
comparatively small. Smokeless powder had told altogether in favour of
the English in the action.

[Illustration:

  MAP OF THE FIGHT NEAR VARNA.

  Facsimile of Sketch from our War Correspondent.
]

Practically the fate of the Russian army was decided. Lord Wolseley was
in full communication with the Bulgarian General, who, with a force
between forty and fifty thousand strong, had been following close upon
the heels of the Russians. There could be no hope that, with their
diminished and discouraged troops, the Russians would be able to defeat
the English forces, against which with their intact army they had failed
on the previous day. Nor could they turn on the Bulgarians without
having both armies upon them at once.

To avoid useless slaughter, the Russian General forty-eight hours later
agreed to lay down his arms. As soon as the Russian army had given up
its guns and was no longer in a position to act effectively, the English
army marched back to the coast, and, according to our latest
information, a considerable part of it had already embarked and sailed
in an unknown direction.

Lord Wolseley, with Admiral Markham and their Staffs, have returned to
Constantinople, doubtless in order to be in communication with Ministers
at home, the Ambassador, the Sultan, and other sources of information.
It is only fair to a gallant enemy to say that the startling success
which has attended our arms is, apart from the gallantry of our soldiers
and the skill of the General who led them, to be attributed to the
enormous advantage which is possessed by the Power that commands the
sea.

From the moment that our fleet cut off the communications of the Russian
Army, the Russian General was in a position, such as in our time can
rarely happen, of being completely deprived of all means of knowing what
his enemy was doing, while, on the other hand, our own Commander was
able to obtain information far more accurate than is common in war of
everything that his opponent did. No other Power in Europe could have
reached and destroyed with the same ease and certainty that dangerous
Russian force, susceptible of indefinite increase, as long as Russia
held the sea. Meantime, speculation is rife as to the direction in which
our army is next going to strike.




                          ENTHUSIASM IN CAIRO.

                    DEPARTURE OF THE ENGLISH TROOPS.


       (_From our Special Correspondent, Mr. Francis Scudamore._)

                                                         CAIRO, _May 8_.

For the past two days the entire populace of this city has lived in a
state of frenzied excitement, to which the seething clamour of the days
immediately following the memorable 15th September 1882 is only faintly
comparable. Then it was, with the arrival before the gate of the citadel
of Sir Drury Lowe and his cavalry brigade fresh from Tel-el-Kebir, that
England’s peaceful occupation of Cairo began. There were no Europeans in
Cairo at the time, and even the better classes of Egyptians had either
fled to distant parts of the country or lay hidden in their spacious
houses, closely barred against intrusion by friend or foe. Demonstration
of popular feeling was confined to the astounded and panic-ridden
natives of the lower orders, whose bewildered minds swung for a week
between fearful anticipation of the horrors they had been taught to
expect at the hands of the English, and trembling delight that the reign
of terror under Arabi and Toulba had at length come to an end. They
needed time, these stricken, starving people, to discover the state of
their feelings; to decide whether they were pleased that foreign aid had
come to them, or were only glad to know that Arabi had fled, and would
soon be in prison; and in their indecision, for two whole days and
nights dense crowds of wandering Arabs, Fellaheen, street merchants,
clerks, donkey-boys, and small officials, thronged the European quarters
of the town, ceaselessly jostling each other through the streets, and
murmuring repeatedly, ‘The English have come. The Effendina is coming.’

That was ten years ago. During those ten years the English soldiers and
the Cairenes, both natives and foreigners, have learned so well to know
and appreciate each other, that when it leaked out (who shall say how)
on Sunday evening that orders had been received for the immediate
embarkation of all the British troops in garrison here, the announcement
clanged like a tocsin through the startled town.

Once again the Frank quarter was filled with an anxious wondering mob,
formed not of Arabs only, but of all the varied nationalities that make
up Cairo’s thriving population, who roamed the broad streets round the
Esbekeeyeh Gardens, silent, orderly, and sad, or gathered in
tight-packed masses in front of Shepheard’s and the New Hotel, and the
Sporting Club, and lingered for hours in slowly changing thousands in
the great square facing the Abdeen barracks.

It was near midnight, and the moon was high, when the news became
generally known. The band of the Alexandria Regiment had for some time
ceased playing in the Esbekeeyeh Gardens, and nearly all English
soldiers were back in barracks. Some few men, however, who had twelve
o’clock leave, were still abroad, and as, on their way home, they
shouldered through the throng—wondering, no doubt, what could be the
matter—they were instantly seized upon by scores of eager well-wishers,
delighted to find an outlet for some portion of the cordial enthusiasm
pent up within them. Of one of these spontaneous outbursts of affection
towards ‘Thomas Atkins’ I was myself a witness. I was standing with
other Englishmen and ladies on Shepheard’s balcony watching the shifting
masses of the crowd below, when suddenly there arose, some way up the
street—beyond the British Consulate—a wild confused noise of cheering.
It was a queer kind of cheer, such as could probably be heard nowhere
else in the world—a strange blending of the Zughareet of Arab women—the
guttural Fellah Hàgh, the Italian Viva, and the Greek Huzzah, with a
leavening of Levantine squeal; but the outcome of the mixture was
sufficiently startling to make us turn—for a moment anxiously—in the
direction of the sound. Then the crowd before us took up the cry, and
quickly pressing back on either side of the way, left room for the
passage of the most extraordinary procession it has yet fallen to my lot
to behold.

[Illustration:

  SCENE OUTSIDE SHEPHEARD’S HOTEL, CAIRO: TOMMY ATKINS ABOUT TO QUIT
    EGYPT.
]

First, leaping in a frantic dance such as one sees here at weddings and
religious festivals, came some score of sayces, their lawn sleeves
flaunting as they waved their arms, and their gold-broidered waistcoats
gleaming bravely in the moonlight. Their usual cry of ‘_Shmarlek,
Gemeelek_,’ was interrupted now by hoarse shouts of ‘Inglis, Inglis,
long live the Inglis!’—shouts which the crowd readily took up.
Immediately behind them paced a tall, half-naked negro, who—such is the
length to which enthusiasm will carry these fanatics—held outstretched
before him (a sacrifice to friendship), his brawny right arm transfixed
by a long knife, from whose blade his blood dripped freely to the
ground. A carriage followed—an ordinary hack victoria, captured,
doubtless, close by—round which a frenzied mob surged, yelling and
gesticulating madly. There was no driver on the carriage. The box-seat
was occupied by a mandolin player and a harpist, whose fingers were very
busy, though of their music not one note could be heard. In the victoria
were the objects of the demonstration, two English soldiers, one of
whom, while preserving his good temper, was struggling manfully though
vainly against a dozen pair of hands that held him in his place, and
loudly declaring in words as unavailing as they were forcible that he
was due in barracks at midnight and could not ‘stay fooling’ any later.
His protest was disregarded, and his comrade, who had apparently
succumbed to the hospitality of a burly Greek who faced the pair, on the
Strapontin, nursing a huge demijohn of some pernicious liquor, gave him
no help, expressing neither approval nor condemnation of the
proceedings, and, indeed, but for the tender ministrations of an old
äalem in a saffron robe, who stood on the step beside him, he would
probably have fallen out into the road.

The motley carnival passed slowly into the night; the shouts softened in
the distance and then died away; but the crowd, silent again, remained
staring vacantly at the hotel windows. As I turned from the balcony
railings a quiet native spectator on the pavement beneath me looked up
and spoke in Arabic: ‘Ah, Hawaga,’ he said, ‘Toufik Pasha has gone;
Allah rest him! Now the English are going—evil days are coming.’

Throughout Sunday night and during the whole of yesterday the great
crowd filled the streets. Even the announcement made yesterday afternoon
that, although the English soldiers were called suddenly away, their
Indian brothers-in-arms would replace them, failed to satisfy the public
mind, or to remove the painful impression it had received. In some vague
way the feeling of the native populace was that, though the Indian
troops might be soldiers of England’s Queen, they were not the English
they had known; the English who wore yellow clothes, and blue goggles,
and hats with towels on them, and who paid so well for donkey hire, and
bought so freely in the bazaars, and were so easily persuaded to accept
bits of imported blue glass as valuable turquoises, ‘and wonderfully
cheap.’

With very few exceptions all British troops were confined to barracks
yesterday—not so much on account of their preparations for departure,
for ever since the reinforcement of the garrison the commanders of
regiments have been held in readiness to entrain in two hours after
receipt of orders—but in order to avoid the repetition, on probably a
very large scale, of Sunday night’s demonstrations. The natives,
therefore, were fain to be content with standing in thousands outside
the barrack-yard gates gazing at the busy scene within, while from time
to time some English-speaking donkey-boy would accost the impassive
sentries on behalf of himself and friends with some such speech as, ‘You
going, Missa Soja, Arab prenty solly.’

Thanks to the energy and foresight of the Commander-in-Chief in
carefully policing the whole length of the canal with troops from Suez
to Port Said to prevent any such apt accident as the sinking of a
dredger in a narrow part, the transports suffered no delay. Each
ship—there were eight (chartered vessels of the P. and O., British India
and Orient Lines)—on reaching Suez landed the troops she had brought
from Bombay and passed on into the Canal, employing the time of her
passage in cleaning up for the reception of the English regiments at
Alexandria. The Indian brigades are for the moment encamped on the Sweet
Water Canal, pending dispatch to their several stations.

The British troops were entrained to-day at noon. Two Soudanese and one
Egyptian regiment lined the entry to the railway station as a guard of
honour. The young Khedive himself, accompanied by his brother, Mehemet
Ali Bey, and followed by Zulfikar Pasha and many of the court
functionaries, drove to the station to bid them farewell, and arriving a
few moments before the first of the departing regiments, caused his
carriage to be so placed that the men must march past it. As each
regiment passed him, His Highness, who had alighted and stood beside the
victoria, saluted, and said repeatedly ‘Good-bye, gentlemen,’ in
English. To entrain the troops took, of course, some little time, and
the —— remained a while in the small square outside the station while
their comrades were taking their places in the coaches. His Highness,
who looked very grave and had spoken but briefly with Sir Evelyn Baring
and other English gentlemen present, had entered his carriage, and the
sayces had leapt to their places before it, when suddenly a voice
shouted, ‘Three cheers for Abbas Pasha.’ Who the enthusiast was I do not
care to guess; but the cry was taken up eagerly. Despite discipline,
despite etiquette, against propriety even though it was, a mighty cheer
burst from the waiting troops round the royal carriage, and was echoed
from within the station with redoubled volume.

The Khedive seemed for a moment overcome. Then he drove quickly away.
The farewell of the native populace to the troops as they marched
through the streets was pathetic in its earnestness. By a purely
spontaneous motion all Cairo had gathered wherever it could to wish the
Englishmen ‘God go with you.’ The passage of the regiments was marked by
innumerable incidents showing the affection in which the men were held
and the genuine distress of the people at their loss. A typical instance
of this native enthusiasm is worth recording. In the —— regiment—I
purposely avoid naming it—for some time quartered in the Citadel, is a
turbulent giant known as ‘Mad Donald’—a long service man, greatly liked,
known for gallantry in the field, and steady enough on parade; but who
has twice lost his stripes for drunkenness. For he is not content to be
passively drunk, but must also be violent. Under the influence of
alcohol destruction becomes his ruling passion. In his periodical
outbursts Donald has been a terror to the many street merchants whose
displays of fragile wares cumber the Er Rumeyleh Square, at the head of
the Mooskee. He has overturned their tables, made wholesale havoc of
their goods, and fought the crowd with the trestles of the spoiled. His
chief enemy and victim has been an old dealer in gaudy crockery and
glass ornaments, whose entire stock he has several times reduced to
shivers, and then danced upon the wreck, defying the police. Yet to-day
as the —— marched by, with stalwart Donald leading man of his company,
this old man dragged his table forward, crying, ‘Ya, Donal; ya, Donal;
break something for luck’—and was quite distressed at the tall soldier’s
smiling disregard.

When the last train had steamed out of the station the immense concourse
of people who, on either side of the line, had for an hour yelled
farewells, fell once more to silently pacing the streets, where they
still remain at this late hour. I have been for long among them and am
forced to say that what was indicated to me on Sunday night by one man
is now the prevailing sentiment of the multitude, ‘The English have
gone—the Effendina will go soon—evil days are coming.’

                                                 ALEXANDRIA, _May 28th_.

You are aware that the English garrison was detained in the
neighbourhood of Alexandria, and was largely reinforced by other troops
forming part of the Eastern Expedition. Among the exciting events taking
place in other parts of the world there has been nothing here of
sufficient interest to occupy your columns. The troops have been waiting
for orders to embark, which came immediately after our great naval
victory.

All the regiments embarked to-day, and five of the transports have
already started. Their commanders have sealed orders, but we fancy here
they are bound, in the first instance, for Cyprus, and then to take part
in a movement against Algiers, unless, indeed, they are bound for the
Black Sea. You will probably know their destination sooner than we
shall.




                       FRENCH INTRIGUES IN EGYPT.

                        RISING OF THE MAHDISTS.


       (_From our Special Correspondent, Mr. Francis Scudamore._)

                                                      CAIRO, _June 3rd_.

You have heard from other sources of Sir F. Grenfell’s reappointment to
the command in Egypt, and of the fact that he had undertaken that, if a
certain number of Indian troops were sent to him, he would be
responsible for the safety of Egypt, although all the garrison then in
occupation was sent to join the Eastern Expedition. My last letter from
Alexandria informed you of the departure of these troops. I may add that
the Brigade of Indian troops sent to our support had landed two days
previously at Suez, and had been moved up to Cairo during my absence.
Yesterday they marched past the Khedive in the square of the Abdeen
palace. Their splendid appearance recalled the impression which had been
produced by the contingent from India which had in the same square
marched past the former Khedive after the campaign of 1882.

We have heard of the arrival of the English fleet and part of the
expedition at Constantinople, and are anxiously awaiting further news.

We have, however, little time for reading. Our troubles at home give us
plenty of occupation. The European population of Cairo is made up mainly
of Germans, Italians, Greeks, French, and English. The French, to whose
ranks are added Coptic, Armenian, and Levantine _protégés_ and
sympathisers, greatly outnumber any of the other nationalities, and,
with some noteworthy exceptions, are not very estimable representatives
of their nation. To preserve peace and order among these excitable
peoples, whose countrymen are all cutting one another’s throats at home,
is no light task, and has, despite the precautions taken, occasionally
proved too much for all the powers of diplomacy, even when backed by
General Baker Pasha’s _gendarmerie_. On the first rumour of war Sir
Evelyn Baring and his colleagues, fully appreciating the dangers of the
situation, formed themselves, with some leading citizens, into an
International Peace Committee, of which the Prime Minister is chairman,
and agreed on various measures for the preservation of tranquillity in
the community. The first of these measures (and subsequent events have
shown its necessity) was the general prohibition to Arabs and Europeans
alike, from carrying weapons of any kind (including walking-sticks or
umbrellas) in the streets of Cairo or Alexandria. In 1882, between the
time (11th June) of the Arab rising and the bombardment (11th July), a
like prohibition did good service in Alexandria; but now, despite its
rigorous enforcement, there have already been several fierce encounters
between the hot-blooded French and Italians. The new French
Consul-General, I am forced to say, has given no help to the Peace
Committee, and has rather made it his business to frustrate their
counsels and mar their plans.

A very clever French journal, _La Dernière Nouvelle_, published since
the opening of the war, which daily prints marvellous accounts of
British, German, and Italian defeats, is notoriously concocted in its
entirety within the four walls of the French Legation. There are,
indeed, no Frenchmen in the community outside of these walls capable of
producing at once so witty and so scurrilous a sheet, or one so entirely
dependent for its news on the imagination of its editors. Their reports
are accepted by their own readers. None of the more accurate accounts
from other sources are believed. But the arrogance and aggressive
attitude of the French colony and Consul-General, the vicious
blatherings of _La Dernière Nouvelle_, the nightly chanting by turbulent
members of the French community outside Shepheard’s Hotel and the
British Legation of ‘Malbrouque s’enfuit du Caire; On ne l’y verra
plus,’ and kindred versions of old songs adapted to the requirements of
the moment, together with the breaking of some dozens of English and
Italian heads in dark byways and noisy taverns, are, after all, but
minor matters, and very trivial as compared with the rumours of
impending trouble that reach us from the southern frontier. Our news
from the Nile outposts is grave.

The Khalifa Abdullah Taashi and the Emir Osman Khalid Zogal, who
commands at Dongola, have long been in communication with Cairo.
Indeed—since we are at war with France, it may as well be said—for years
it has been known in well-informed circles here, that leading members of
the French colony were in constant, though, thanks to General Grenfell’s
vigilance, irregular, correspondence with the Khalifa’s officers. Thus
there is no doubt that the Khalifa has been informed of the withdrawal
of the English troops from Egypt, and of their replacement by Indian
regiments. He has probably been assured that, owing to the general
conflict in Europe, Egypt can in no event hope for further
reinforcements from England. His opinion of the fighting value of Indian
soldiers is presumably low. The only operations in which Indian troops
have taken part in the Soudan were those near Suakim in March 1885
(M^cNeil’s Zareba and the Battle of Hasheen); and Osman Digna, in his
written reports to the Mahdi, claimed these engagements as decided
victories for the Ansar. The Khalifa, therefore, with some degree of
reason, considers the moment opportune for a descent on Egypt in force,
and for this descent he is making preparations on a large scale.

Colonel Wodehouse, who is at Wady Halfa, reports the existence at Ginnis
of a new Mahdist camp, formed within the past month, which now numbers
from six to seven thousand Tokuls. On the west bank, a smaller camp is
being formed at Dal. The Arabs daily scout in numbers right up to Sarras
and to the fort at Khor Moussa, on which they fire nightly. Saleh Bey,
the Sheikh of the Abadeh tribe, whose duty it is to guard the eastern
desert between Korosko and the Wells of Murat, has reported that last
week, having news of preparations for a forward movement at Abu Hammid,
he occupied Murat with a body of 250 men. He was attacked on the night
of May 29th by a large force of horse and camel-men, and after a hot
engagement, in which he had 57 men killed and lost 108 camels, he was
forced to abandon the Wells to the enemy and retreat to the
Bab-el-Korosko. The Murat Wells, he says, will not supply a force of 500
men for more than three days, and he, therefore, fears an advance on
Ongat and Haimur. A small body of Kababish tribesmen, the remnant of
that once powerful clan who, though for some time with the enemy, are
still loyal, have reached Halfa from Dongola, where they say great
preparations are being made for an advance. Daily small detachments of
Jehadieh and considerable bodies of Ansar arrive at Dongola from
Omdurman, and large supplies of provisions are being collected. Three
nuggars, laden with dhurra, were wrecked, they say, less than a month
ago, on the rocks near Barkhal. A good deal of doubt attaches to this
statement, but if it be true, it indicates a very early rise of the
Nile, for at this season, as a rule, the whole 140 miles of river from
Abu Hammid to Barkhal is a veritable maze of rock-strewn passages,
impassable by even the smallest boats. These tribesmen travelled by the
west bank, and say that from Dongola to Dal, the route was like that to
a fair.

The Sirdar starts for the front to-night, and kindly permits me to
accompany him. Colonel Kitchener expresses himself thoroughly confident
that his own troops are strong enough to cope with any forces the enemy
may bring to meet him; but a feeling of uneasiness in some high quarters
here, coupled may be with the fact that troops at Halfa and Korosko have
lately suffered severely from influenza, has caused some pressure to be
brought on him, with the result that it has been decided that the 17th
Bengal Native Infantry and the 29th Beloochees are to act under his
orders and co-operate with the Egyptian forces if necessary. They were
sent by train to Assiout yesterday afternoon, and have already started
for Assouan, Mr. Cook having undertaken their transport in flat-bottomed
barges, towed by steamers of four feet draught. My next letter will
probably be from Wady Halfa.




                     FIERCE BATTLE NEAR WADY HALFA.

                     FULL DESCRIPTION OF THE FIGHT.


                                                WADY HALFA, _June 14th_.

The 17th Bengal Regiment reached here last night in four barges towed by
steamers, having made the distance in six days—without accidents—and is
encamped on the west bank, opposite Halfa. The Beloochees, one of whose
towing steamers ran aground near Derr, occasioning seven hours’ delay,
will probably be here to-morrow. We are still in uncertainty as to the
Arab plan of attack. The state of the river between Sarras and Semneh
has prevented the use of the armed pinnace for reconnaissance purposes,
and, although the Egyptian Camel Corps has repeatedly pushed forward
along the west bank to within a few miles of Dal, their Commander has
been able to gain very little insight into the enemy’s movements. It
seems likely, however, that the Emir’s attack will be made on the east
bank, but against what point between Sarras and Korosko it will be
directed, there is as yet no sufficient indication.

Sheikh Mustapha Gibran, who, with 150 men, occupies the Selima Oasis in
the western desert some sixty miles inland from Dal, reports that, with
the exception of a party of some fifty camp followers who came out to
Selima in the beginning of last week apparently to obtain salt, he has
been unmolested. On the east bank an attempt was made three days ago, at
a reconnaissance into the Batn-el-Hagar, or ‘Belly of Rock,’ which
borders the river between Sarras and the wells at Ambigol, forming an
almost impassable barrier to troops. The enterprise was near resulting
in the annihilation of the reconnoitring party; for the rocks were found
to be full of Arabs, who sprang up on every side to the attack.
Fortunately their dash was made too early, and Captain Beech was able to
retire in good order, but with a loss of four men. We expect, however,
that a very few days more will discover the tactics of the Emirs.

                                         WADY HALFA, _June 20th_, 6 A.M.

A decisive engagement was fought yesterday near this place, with
the result that after five hours of hard—in some cases of
desperate—fighting, during the course of which the issue was at
times uncertain, this latest tide of invasion has been rolled back
once more into the desert. The Arabs have suffered terrible loss.
Our own casualties, of which I have not as yet full particulars,
are, I regret to say, very considerable. The Arab attack was
intended to be a surprise, but this plan was partially defeated by
one of those simple accidents which occasionally upset the
calculations of commanding officers.

Leaving aside Assouan and Korosko, the defending forces in and around
Wady Halfa numbered, with details, medical staff, bearer companies,
etc., about 6500 officers and men. This is without counting the
navigating crews of the gunboats (armed with Krupp and machine guns), or
the Indian regiment still on its way up the Nile.

Early the day before yesterday, Captain Beech, with a company of the
Camel Corps, pushed forward on the west bank to within 200 yards of Dal
without touching the enemy. He reported Dal abandoned by the fighting
men (who had presumably crossed to the east bank), and occupied only by
several thousand women and camp followers, who fled on his approach. The
same evening the Colonel commanding at Korosko, telegraphed news of an
attack in force on the Irregulars at the Bab-el-Korosko, to whose
assistance he had sent the 5th Battalion Egyptian Infantry.

Almost coincident with the receipt of this news was the discovery of a
large Arab force in the hills east of Halfa. A small body of Cavalry,
under Lieutenant Abd-el-Azrak, scouting at the base of the hills,
suddenly perceived two mounted men (on camels) appear on a height,
while, at the same moment, a shot was fired. This was probably an
accident, but it was evidently regarded as a signal, for immediately,
with a great shout, men sprang up everywhere among the rocks. A heavy
fire was opened upon the Egyptians, and a body of some hundred Arabs was
seen to dash down a small scrub-clad khor towards the plain. Lieutenant
Abd-el-Azrak, who, in the first fire, had suffered a loss of two horses
killed and one trooper wounded, trotted back to Halfa (he was not
pursued), where the noise of firing had already announced his discovery.

[Illustration:

  SOUDANESE ATTACK UPON A RECONNOITRING PARTY.
]

The Sirdar at once made arrangements to meet the impending attack.
Deberra was advised of the news by telephone. The 7th Battalion Egyptian
Infantry was marched to Dabrosa to reinforce the half-battalion there;
Sarras was warned to keep up steam on two engines, and hold the 11th
Soudanese in readiness to entrain if required; and, at the same time a
pilot engine, accompanied by half a squadron of Cavalry was sent forward
to examine the line. The enemy was apparently not ready, and, though he
would have had us at a disadvantage, delayed his attack.

All night long we could hear the noggaras beaten in the Arab bivouac,
and the air was so still that even the voices of the Fikis and their
congregations wailing in prayer were plainly audible.

In the grey of the dawn the Sirdar made a reconnaissance with all
mounted troops, and found the base of the first low range of hills
immediately opposite Halfa covered for a stretch of over a mile with the
enemy, whose irregular lines were sometimes two or three, and sometimes
a dozen or more, men deep. Behind them the heights were thickly crowned
with _rayas_ (banners), which we estimated at near a hundred in number
(we afterwards found they were eighty-seven). This implied that we had a
force opposed to us of near 10,000 Jehadieh (regulars), and probably at
least half as many Ansar.

One of these _rayas_ was pointed out by a deserter as the green banner
of Ali Wad el Helu, while another was said to be that of the Emir of
Emirs, Abd el Maula el Taashi himself. On a height near this banner the
enemy had mounted a brass gun.

Everything being reported clear on the west bank, where for miles no
trace of an Arab force was to be seen, the Bengal regiment was brought
across the river at dawn in native boats, and half-an-hour later the
11th Soudanese arrived from Sarras. With the force thus at his disposal,
in all some 4000 men, the Sirdar decided to draw the enemy to an attack.

The hills lie about four and a half miles east of Halfa, extending for
some distance in a line parallel with the river bank. For about two
miles, however, from the slopes, the ground is irregular, much broken,
filled with deep pits and sudden ledges which would be as eminently
suitable for the enemy’s favourite tactics as it were unfavourable for
operations of troops. The Sirdar, from the position he had taken up at
the beginning of this broken ground, ordered forward the two guns of the
Horse Battery, which opened fire on the enemy’s position at 6.30 A.M.
This soon had the desired effect; the Arabs—after endeavouring to reply
with their gun, whose fire, owing to the long range and their defective
ammunition, was quite ineffective—formed into two columns, preceded by a
long straggling line of skirmishers, and advanced rapidly. The guns now
retired a thousand yards, and the mounted troops having poured
(dismounted) a couple of volleys into the advancing spearmen at 400
yards range, slowly retired, still firing, on the artillery. This
manœuvre was twice repeated with every success, the well-directed fire
of the guns doing considerable execution in the enemy’s advancing host,
while the galling fire of the mounted troops irritated them to
forgetfulness of prudence. The fire of the Arab riflemen posted on the
first slopes of the hills and scattered in the broken ground at their
base did us less damage than it caused the enemy’s advancing lines; but
this did not appear to be noticed by the Arab commanders.

When the Horse Artillery had reached a point some 2000 yards from the
fort at Halfa, the Sirdar ordered out the 1st Infantry Brigade,
consisting of the Indian Regiment, the 12th Soudanese, and the
half-battalion 9th Soudanese, together with the 1st and 2d Field
Batteries (six guns in all).

The mounted troops were then ordered to make a _détour_ to the north to
prevent any portion of the enemy avoiding the battle and advancing
towards Deberra. At the same time, the 2d Brigade, consisting of the
11th Soudanese, the 7th Egyptian Infantry, and half-battalion of the 1st
Egpytian Infantry, were ordered to advance from Dabrosa to check any
movement towards the river in that direction. The guns of Halfa Fort
were able to do good service in support of the 1st Brigade.
Unfortunately the height of the river banks rendered the gunboats
useless until the enemy should reach the Nile itself.

The Arabs were fighting for water. Their long _détour_ round the
Batn-el-Hagar must have tried them severely, for though they had
probably found some springs in the hills, these would be altogether
insufficient for the wants of so large a force. When they saw the
disposition of the Sirdar’s troops they did not hesitate for a moment. A
force, roughly computed at about six thousand men, of whom some two
thousand were riflemen, and the rest spear and swordsmen, dashed forward
in a formation something like that of a Zulu impi upon the 1st Brigade,
which was at once formed into a square, with the guns about 200 yards to
its left rear. The Arabs made three attempts to rush the square; but
there was no cover for them in the open plain, and, though in their
second charge they succeeded in crushing in for a moment, by sheer
weight of numbers, the right front corner, the half-battalion of the 9th
Soudanese, which was in reserve, was able to fill the gap and repulse
the heavy mass of spearmen. Their signal failure ultimately counselled
them prudence. They did not as yet recognise their defeat, but drew off
into the broken ground, where they maintained themselves for some time
keeping up an incessant galling fire upon our ranks, despite our efforts
to dislodge them, and making from time to time dashes in force upon any
point in our lines that seemed weak. We had literally to hunt them from
cover to cover in this broken ground, and, I fear, suffered severely in
the process, as the advantages were with them. At length, however, after
three hours’ desperate fighting, they drew off to a position behind the
first low range of hills, and the brigade advancing poured volley after
volley into their retreating numbers; while the artillery shelled their
position, with, as we found afterwards, considerable effect. Meanwhile a
second body of Arabs in two divisions had made for the river bank, just
north of Dabrosa, at a point where, for a distance of some two miles,
palm groves and plantations, some hundred yards deep, fringe the bank.
While one division of spearmen hurled itself against the 2d Brigade,
which had advanced rapidly to meet it, the other gained the plantation,
from whose cover a heavy fire was poured both on the 2d Brigade and on
Dabrosa village. This success was, however, only temporary. The gunboat
_Abu Klea_ was able to bring its platform machine gun to bear on the
plantation with murderous effect; while, when he had repulsed the
division attacking him, which he did with great slaughter, Colonel
Wodehouse, commanding the 2d Brigade, detached a regiment to rake the
plantation from south to north; before whose fire some thousand Arabs,
the remnant of those who had gained this cover, were speedily in hot
retreat across the plain. These retreating stragglers the mounted troops
now steadily drove southward to the hills.

It was 1 P.M. before the day could be said to be ours. By this time the
whole plain was strewn with dead and wounded Arabs, many of them in
chain armour, many more in the parti-coloured Mahdi uniform, not a few
almost naked. When the Sirdar’s forces occupied the first range of
hills, we captured no less than thirty-seven standards whose Emirs had
presumably perished. All the afternoon deserters came in from the enemy
to give themselves up. From some of these men we learned that the force
was commanded by Abd-el-Maula himself, and that among the other high
commanders were the Emir Ali Wad el Helu, the Emir Khalid Zogal
(commandant of Dongola), and Wad Zubehr Rahama, the son of Zubehr, who
escaped across the frontier last autumn. Many hundred rifles, swords,
spears, and shields still litter the plain, where they are being
collected; and in the camp behind the hill were found no fewer than
fifty-nine noggaras or war drums.




              THE FRANCO-GERMAN CAMPAIGN—RESCUE OF PARIS.

                        RETREAT OF THE GERMANS.


                   (_From a Correspondent in Paris._)

                                                       PARIS, _June 28_.

The situation is inexplicable. The foe is at the gates. The outposts
have been driven in, and it said that two of the forts have been
surrendered. All day long a great stream of vehicles, laden with every
imaginable article of furniture, and accompanied by crowds of
disconsolate citizens, has been pouring into Paris over every available
bridge. The Bois de Boulogne is a huge camp, and every tree along the
Boulevards serves as shelter to a suburban family. Yet the absence of
excitement is extraordinary. There has been a good deal of murmuring at
the interference of the Government with the Generals. Divided counsels,
it is said, and a refusal to give General de Saussier a free hand, led
to the defeats in Belgium. As usual, a mob assembled this morning in
front of the Tuileries, crying out for the deposition of the President;
and it is reported that a couple of Government clerks were somewhat
maltreated. But the demonstration was insignificant, probably the work
of German _provocateurs_, and the crowd of roughs and pickpockets
dispersed with the utmost rapidity when two squadrons of Gardes
Républiques were seen trotting down the Boulevard.

The execution of the seven Anarchist leaders three days ago has had a
very salutary effect. I have just had an interview with M. de
Freycinet’s private secretary. He has become positively bland at the
sound of the German cannon, distinctly heard beyond the river. To my
reflections on the gravity of the situation he replied, with a smile and
a bow, that although New York and Philadelphia were once occupied by the
enemy, yet the American Revolution was _un fait accompli_. As we were
speaking the President’s carriage passed at a trot, and I had a good
view of the cool-headed citizen who holds the anxious position of First
Magistrate of the Republic. He certainly displayed no symptoms of
anxiety, and I fancy the crowd that witnessed his progress found
something magnetic in his easy smile. Never in the piping times of peace
have I heard such plaudits as followed his equipage.

The same air of quiet confidence characterises all the members of the
Government whom I have met to-day. Whether it is justified or not, only
the future can reveal; but I may say that, notwithstanding the defeat at
Machault, the rapid advance of the Germans on the capital, and the
occupation of Rheims, the spirit of the French nation is untamed. My
military friends own frankly that at Machault they were fairly beaten by
superior numbers. The movement into Belgium, they say, was intended
merely as a demonstration, and the commander exceeded his orders in
fighting a pitched battle against great odds. As to the capture of
Rheims, they preserve a discreet silence; and the report of the
annihilation of two divisions near Bar-le-Duc is received with an
incredulous smile. Even whilst admitting the fact that many wounded men
have been abandoned to the care of the enemy, one of General de
Saussier’s aides-de-camp shrugged his shoulders, and remarked that they
would be none the worse for a short visit to the Rhine. _Nous verrons ce
que nous verrons!_

                                                       _June 29_, 6 P.M.

The President’s smile seems to have had some reason. The rescue of Paris
has been accomplished in as dramatic a fashion as that of Andromeda.
General de Negrier is the Perseus. At 2 A.M. the quiet of the summer
night was suddenly broken. Above the ceaseless rumble of the carts along
the Boulevards were heard the unmistakable sounds of battle, and the
eastern horizon was lit up as if by the northern lights. The weird
streamers of the electric lanterns in the forts struck quivering through
the darkness; and away beyond, the long rattle of musketry rose and
fell. Mounting in hot haste, I rode down to the Porte St. Mandé, but
could get no further. Very wisely, the road was kept clear for the
troops, should they be compelled to retreat, and in any case the long
train of ammunition tumbrils and ambulances left but little room for
enterprising civilians. The high parapet of the old _enceinte_ was
thronged with anxious crowds, a black, silent mass, gazing intently into
the darkness out beyond. At one time the roar of battle appeared to be
coming nearer. It may have been due perhaps to a change in the wind; but
the suppressed exclamations and the sudden impulsive movement showed the
pent-up excitement of the people. Then there was a lull; and then the
muffled roar was heard again, but distinctly further away, and even as
we listened, receding in the distance. It was at this moment that a
faint echo of trumpets and rolling drums was borne upon the breeze,
followed by the far-off sound of a mighty cry, the long shout of triumph
of a victorious onset; and a deep sigh of relief burst from the
close-packed thousands on the wall. It was not till day had dawned that
a staff-officer was seen galloping towards the Porte St. Mandé from the
battlefield; and we learned that the garrison of Paris had inflicted a
decisive defeat on their over-confident foe, and that last year’s
experiments in offensive operations by night around the capital had
borne their full fruit. As I write, ambulance after ambulance full of
wounded, and long columns of German prisoners, dirty, footsore, and
begrimed with powder, attest the severity of the fighting and the
completeness of the victory.

                                                                  LATER.

I have had the opportunity of speaking to some of the German prisoners.
One of them, a gentleman whom I have often met in Washington and Boston,
says the troops were exhausted by the hard work of the previous days,
and believing the French were thoroughly cowed, were utterly
disconcerted by De Negrier’s sudden offensive. He blames the rashness of
the leaders in pushing on to Paris with large armies still in the field
on either flank of their communications. It appears that before the
attack took place news had been received of a great disaster to the
covering force of three Corps near Bar-le-Duc, and this was the Medusa’s
head which paralysed the German power of resistance. ‘Oh, for one hour
of Von Moltke,’ is the universal sentiment amongst the prisoners.
Another officer, a Bavarian, was much surprised at the reports of great
German successes in the East which have appeared in the English
newspapers. He declares that the French movements were merely
reconnaissances in force, in two instances pushed too far, and that the
Germans suffered very heavily. The number of prisoners taken by the
Germans has been very greatly exaggerated; the majority were severely
wounded men, and are a great source of trouble to their captors. This
officer appears to have little love for the Emperor, scoffs at his
‘divine mission,’ and hints that Bavaria, at least, is very weary of the
Prussian hegemony.

                                                                  4 P.M.

The Germans are in full retreat. The force that last night threatened
the capital from the west has been heavily defeated by De Negrier. Paris
is itself again. A member of the Government tells me that General de
Saussier, acting on De Miribel’s advice, had resolved from the first to
allow the rash offensive of the enemy to have free play; believing that
the traditions of 1870 and the terrible strain of a double war on their
meagre resources would impel them to make a rush on Paris, in the hope
of finishing the war at a single blow. The Emperor seems to have
expected much from internal dissensions in France. ‘But,’ says the
Minister, ‘when the aristocrats condescended to become Republicans,
France became once more a nation. In 1870 we had our Federals and
Confederates, our Imperialists and our Radicals. To-day, political
differences mean as little as in America.’




                    ADVANCE OF GENERAL DE GALLIFFET.

                          SIGHTING THE ENEMY.


        (_From an American Correspondent with the French Army._)

                                            CHAUMONT, _June 29_, 10 P.M.

At length the embargo placed on all letters since the 30th of May has
been removed, and the correspondents are free to telegraph without
restriction as to matter or quantity. Since May the 25th, until ten days
ago, General de Galliffet’s magnificent army has been quiescent under
shelter of the strong camps of Langres, Epinal, and Belfort. Even our
cavalry has had little to do beyond sending out numerous officers’
patrols, north, east, and west. The General preferred trusting to a
strong screen of infantry outposts; and on their side the Germans,
though reported to be very strong in the neighbourhood of Bar-le-Duc,
have remained inactive.

It is surprising with what patience the French soldiery endured this
weary time of waiting; but the men have supreme confidence in the hero
of Sedan, and their intelligence is of a very high order. However, your
Frenchman is a restless being, and discipline was put to a severe test
when rumour of a German advance on Paris filtered through the camps. But
General de Galliffet, by most judicious orders of the day, exposing the
errors of the Germans in advancing without first securing their
communications, and enlarging on the strength of the fortifications of
the capital, appealed to the soldierly intelligence of the army, and not
in vain. Still, the fierce desire of the troops to meet their detested
enemies had been curbed almost beyond bounds by the 20th of June, and I
scarcely think, strong as the General is, that he would have dared to
delay movement for another day.

Long before day had broken on the 20th the march began; and for nine
days, over the magnificent roads which run through the rich pastoral
country west of the Moselle, the long columns moved past in the blazing
summer weather, their faces set northward, and their hearts longing for
the battle so long deferred. The splendid marching powers of the French
Infantry of to-day, as well as the high-training and experience of the
Staff, make the movement of 200,000 men and more than 700 guns a matter
of child’s play. The marches are long, and the dust stifling; but still
order and regularity are the characteristics of the great exodus from
the fortresses. The ambulances are empty, and, heavily weighted as they
are, the little linesmen in their long blue capotes and wide red
trousers swing steadily along, laughing and singing as the sun nears his
setting even more cheerily than when the fields on either hand were
fresh with the morning dew. Loud are the cheers that greeted the
General, active as the youngest subaltern of Hussars in spite of his
sixty odd years, as magnificently mounted, he rides slowly past the
regiments, with cheery word of greeting and encouragement to his sturdy
_fantassins_.

On the morning of yesterday reports came in from the cavalry, riding
more than twenty miles to the front, that the Prussians were also
advancing; and the same evening came the first presage of the storm: two
or three ambulances—full this time—and half-a-dozen captured Uhlans.
This sight stilled song and jest: a grim silence fell upon the columns,
and an air of fierce determination took the place of the eager
excitement which had hitherto lit up those mobile faces. The bivouacs
that night were very quiet; the men gathered in little groups round the
camp kettles, or sat apart in their shirt-sleeves, assiduously cleaning
their rifles.

Late last night, as I was turning into my humble billet, shared by two
officers of the Staff, in the Curé’s cottage at Maison d’Or, I received
a message from the Major commanding a Chasseur battalion, who had for
the past three days been moving forward with the cavalry, that he had
obtained permission for me to accompany him on the morrow. It was
unlikely, so my friends on the Staff informed me, that the armies would
come into collision, and if I joined _les petites vitriers_ I would have
an opportunity of seeing something of the cavalry fighting.

Before daybreak, therefore, I found myself in a tiny village consisting
of a church and half-a-dozen farm-houses, with substantial granaries and
gardens, and a single cabaret, in company with one of those battalions
_d’elité_ of the army, the _Chasseurs à pied_, who boast that the
cavalry can neither leave them behind nor do without them.

The village stands in the centre of a rolling valley nearly three miles
broad, running east and west, with a long ridge to the south and another
to the north, dotted with vineyards and potato-patches; but without
hedge, or wall, or ditch.

In the tower of the church, where I found a convenient loft and a narrow
window, I could see, through the morning mist, little bodies of cavalry
well to the front; and behind the village three regiments of Dragoons
were standing, dismounted beside their horses. Away to the north one
would hear at long intervals a shot or two, and messengers came riding
rapidly back to the brigade in rear. One thing struck me as curious;
although I was in the midst of the village, scarcely a Chasseur was to
be seen; and it was not for some time that I descried blue uniforms
lying behind the orchard walls, and now and then a _kepi_ was to be seen
at the windows looking on to the single broad street.




                       BRISK CAVALRY ENGAGEMENT.


As the sunbeams gained more power, I saw that the open slopes of the
opposite ridge, more than a mile and a half away, were covered with
little groups of horsemen, moving steadily forward, and apparently
pressing back our scouts. Even the isolated squadrons to the front began
to give back at a walk, when by the corner of a wood on the sky-line, a
sudden appearance of dark groups of men and horses, with white
electric-looking flashes, betokened the advent of a battery. The
explosion of the first shells awakes our cavalry brigade to action. A
couple of batteries disengage themselves from the mass of horsemen in
rear, and from a knoll to the left of the village our guns are soon
replying to the enemy’s challenge. Shrilly the trumpets sound. The
dragoons mount, and with jingling scabbards and tossing plumes trot away
to where a deep fold in the ground affords them better cover. This
movement is not unobserved by the German scouts; I can see them racing
back over the hill, and in a few moments, it seems, a dark mass of
horsemen appears against the northern horizon, the serried lances
standing out clearly against the cloudless sky. Again the shrill blast
of the trumpet, and our eighteen hundred dragoons are moving out to meet
the foe. With a rush and rattle the rear regiments take ground to either
flank, and the long sabres flash from their scabbards. The hussars are
retiring rapidly, away to the left of the guns, and the field is left
clear for the shock of the opposing masses. My blood tingles with
excitement. The sun glints bravely on the brass helmets of the
Frenchmen; the dark blue mass a mile away is gathering pace like the
mighty breaker of a stormy sea. The lances drop as if by magic, the long
line changes its direction, and then wheels inward. I can see the
officers turning in their saddles, far in front of their squadrons,
signalling with gleaming swords; a hundred seconds will bring them
together, when suddenly, to my horror and disappointment, the French
slacken speed, and, before I can realise the fact, have turned rein and
are riding past the village as if for their lives. Squadrons to the
right, squadrons to the left, and a troop or so clattering madly down
the ill-paved street. Far above the crash of iron hoofs and the rush of
flying squadrons I can hear the hoarse cry of triumph of the foe. Down
they come, heads and lances low, racing in pursuit. A last salvo, which
sends a score of horses stumbling in their tracks, breaks for a moment
the symmetry of that magnificent line, and hurls an officer helpless
beneath the thundering hoofs, and our batteries have limbered up and
dash frantically, with gunners plying whip and spur, across the plain.

They are lost, they are lost, so fast follows the foe, riding in furious
haste to gather the trophies of the fight. A great cloud of dust rises
before them, but I can see the faces of the men as the squadrons diverge
to pass the village, and note the laughter and the shouts of those
fair-haired troopers with the scales upon their shoulders. Suddenly the
leader, riding like Scarlett at Balaclava, twenty lengths in front,
leans back in his stirrups, checks his charger in his headlong career,
and throws his hand high above his head. The trumpeter beside him raises
the trumpet to his lips, but ere the notes ring out they are drowned in
a loud roar of musketry. I had forgotten the Chasseurs in the orchards;
the Germans had never suspected their presence. The surprise is
complete; the disaster overwhelming. Magazine after magazine is
unloaded, and thousands of bullets find an easy target in the seething,
struggling mass, just now advancing so magnificently in all the pride of
order and victory. Round the village the scene is indescribable. The
slaughter is terrible, and in a few moments the squadrons that had
passed unscathed on either side come flying back in the utmost disorder,
pursued on one side by dragoons, on the other by hussars. The valley is
covered to right and left with a dense crowd of horsemen, galloping in
all the excitement of the flight and the pursuit, whilst the German
batteries on the bridge pour shell after shell into the surging crowd,
regardless whether their mark is friend or foe. I have little time to
reflect on the skill with which the trap had been set and baited. My
friend the Commandant calls me from my eyrie, and before I had time even
to note the trace of the stirring events I had seen passing before me,
the Chasseurs are retreating from the village at a pace which puts my
Rosinante to the trot. Very soon we hear the jingle of the cavalry in
rear. The dragoons are retiring also, and as I look back across the
valley I can see the long screen of scouts falling back slowly across
the valley, so still and peaceful but an hour agone, and now strewn with
the awful _débris_ of the conflict. Such was the first phase of the
battle of the 29th of June. ‘_C’est un apéritif_,’ remarks the
Commandant.




                      GREAT VICTORY OF THE FRENCH.

                    FULL DESCRIPTION OF THE BATTLE.


The curtain is not long in drawing up for the second act, and on our
side at least the actors are ready for their cue. From the crest of the
ridge which we have now reached a brilliant scene is visible. A broad
expanse of verdant pasture stretches away to the placid river which runs
between the willows, past the white houses of the little town. Here and
there is a patch of woodland, a few stately poplars, and here and there
a vineyard. The white high road, with its leafy avenue of spreading
trees, now turned into telegraph poles, runs direct to the bridge. On
either side, in squares and oblongs, bright with blue and crimson, with
flashing bayonet and brazen helmet, rests an enormous army, and still
the never-ending columns of men and guns and waggons are forming up for
battle for miles away on every side. On the ridge which hides this huge
array from the advancing enemy are three batteries, filling the air with
uproar, and attracting volley after volley of Prussian shells. One can
hear the shrill whizz of the shrapnel, and turning again to the front,
we see that on the slopes below us the cavalry skirmishers, kneeling
amongst the climbing vines, are in action all along the line. The
Chasseurs have scattered along the crest, but there are no other
infantry visible. I cannot believe De Galliffet is napping. Above the
town rises a great yellow globe, swaying gracefully with every breath of
air, and I know that the General has a penchant for observing his enemy
from the vantage-point of the balloon. If he is really poised up there,
in the bright morning air, he must see those long sombre lines of
skirmishers moving slowly across the plain; those heavier masses
doubling rapidly over the opposite crest and moving down the slopes. He
must know that there are at least six batteries in action against us,
and that there are men bleeding to death beneath the tendrils of the
vines.

Still not a sign. A couple of Staff officers stand near those three
poplars on the hill; one of our batteries falls back, leaving a gun
behind. The cavalry begin to creep further up the hill, but not an
infantryman moves. The enemy has halted more than 1200 yards away. They
are lying in long rows athwart the valley, and the incessant movement of
the rifles, even more than the deafening rattle, tell us that they are
pouring in a heavy fusillade. Another battery to the rear, and yet
another; horses falling wounded in the traces: and then, as if at a
given signal, the long German lines press forward. Their heaviest masses
are away over yonder on our left, where that thick wood, with scarped,
quarried slopes below, terminates the ridge whereon we stand; and over
to the right, where a marshy brook, its stunted willows still shrouded
in mist, breaks through the ridge to join the river, we can see shadowy
columns moving in the far distance.

Another ten minutes, perhaps five, if the Chasseurs give way, and the
enemy will overlook the valley, the town, and the bridges—the bridges,
the most important of all. But even as apprehension gathers it is
dispelled. Turn your back for a moment and look to the south. The earth
is in motion. Long lines of guns are dashing forward at a gallop,
breasting the gentle slope, and driving the dust behind them in swirling
clouds.

Long lines of Infantry are already near the crest, and heavy columns are
rapidly moving up in rear. The unsuspecting Germans are little more than
a thousand paces distant when all along the brow, bare and solitary just
now, two hundred field-pieces come into action almost at the same
moment.

In a moment more the air is literally shaken by the rush and scream of a
hurtling storm of heavy metal; and, lying down in the intervals between
the groups of guns, the infantry sweeps the plain with volley after
volley. The cavalry has retired behind the hill; the vineyards are no
longer tenanted, and the vine leaves, cut by the sheet of bullets, fly
in the air as if blown upwards by the wind.

[Illustration:

  FRENCH CAVALRY CHARGING THE PRUSSIAN INFANTRY.
]

The Prussians stagger beneath the shock. Lines shake and waver; here
give back, and there lie still and motionless; columns, though far away,
break and dissolve under the shrapnel, and then deploy in haste and
confusion; and, above all, the bright sun shines down without a wreath
of smoke to sully his radiance, or to hide his target from the rifleman.
Vainly the supporting lines of the Prussians are hurried to the front.
Impotently the cavalry ride forward. Their guns are already silenced.
The squadrons are checked by an inextricable tangle of falling men and
horses. The long line of infantry is no longer intact. Men are hastening
to the rear, not singly, but in groups. Officers stand out in front for
a moment, and then are seen no more save in shapeless huddled forms on
the dewy grass. The volleys of the French became more regular and
machine-like every moment. A mounted group reaches the hill. It is the
General, his Staff beside him, his _fanion_ at his side. They are too
far off to hear, but I can see De Galliffet pointing to the front, and
the infantry are already moving forward, swooping down upon their prey.
He must be an enemy of more than mortal courage who, decimated and
outnumbered, can withstand the swift yet steady onset of these trim,
regular lines of blue and red. And look, behind—there, in the interval!
A long array of tossing heads and nodding plumes. The Cuirassiers of
France! Let the infantry shake them; brave horsemen, your time is
coming! ‘_N’oubliez pas Reichshoffen!_’ yells a wounded corporal by my
side, and the mighty mass breaks into a trot, and across the plain they
dash, the horse artillery racing in their wake, whilst _viva_ after
_viva_ speeds their onset. The German cavalry, what is left of it, comes
gallantly forward to meet their antagonists, and, if possible, to save
their infantry. But it is too late. In a few moments the plain is
covered with a broken crowd of soldiers. Groups rallying round their
officers are swept away by flying horsemen or serried squadrons;
thousands are now struggling for the ridge; in the centre the
Cuirassiers are bearing all before them in the frenzy of the charge, and
on the flanks the infantry, with rattling volleys, sweep away the
_débris_ of the battle as leaves before the gale.

Before the French reached the ridge beyond, long after the cavalry had
retired to re-form, it appears that they met fresh masses of infantry
hurrying forward to the assistance of their comrades; but the impetus of
victory was too great to be withstood. The fresh troops became involved
in the disaster of their advanced guard, and long ere mid-day De
Galliffet was in secure possession of the second ridge, across which at
daybreak I had seen the Germans advance.

About the noontide hour both armies seemed, as it were by consent, to
allow a breathing space. It was as if some invisible Marshal of the
Lists had thrown down his baton. So here, behind the ridge, whilst the
blazing sun passed over the meridian, lay the columns of the French.
Over against them, in the rolling and open valley, but out of range,
were the faint, blue, wavy lines which marked their enemy’s position.

It was not till after two o’clock that I saw General de Galliffet—who
had been standing alone, looking intently towards the enemy and
impatiently beating his foot upon the ground—make a gesture of relief,
and turning sharp to his orderly dragoon bid him bring up his horse. At
the same moment the German infantry began to move. The artillery had
been for some time in action. A perfect hail of shells tore up the level
surface of the ridge, and our batteries were one by one retiring. Our
present line of infantry is several hundred yards behind the hill, down
in the valley, cooking their soup undisturbed by the shrapnel, and only
a few are called up now to assist the guns against hostile skirmishers.
On come the Prussians, but it is soon evident that the main attack is
not against our centre. Away to the left there, where General Jamont,
the trusted Commander of the 5th Corps d’Armée, holds watch and ward,
the sky is red with dust, and the thunder of the guns and the rattle of
musketry is threefold heavier than with us. I can see our troops moving
in the valley below, from centre to left, linesmen and guns, hurrying to
the point of contact. I am on the point of riding in the same direction,
when one of M. de Galliffet’s aides-de-camp suggests that I have already
a place in the stalls. ‘Down below,’ he says, pointing to the valley,
‘will be played the last agony of Prussia.’

The suspense is terrible. The volleys rise and fall, the roar of the
cannon swells and dies way. The minutes drag by on leaden wings. The
troops in our front are not advancing, even the Artillery seems lazy
this afternoon, and there, even there, where the red dust-clouds hang
over a hell of slaughter, the fate of a nation is being decided. It is
in vain I endeavour to imitate the imperturbability of the General, our
‘lance of iron,’ as the soldiers have learned to call him. A messenger
or two rides up, and is dismissed. There is not a sign on that impassive
countenance. Here is another, galloping at speed, grey with dust, and
horse foaming with haste. At last! The General straightens himself up.
He raises his hand to his _kepi_ with the golden leaves, as if he were
saluting a superior. Is it France or Fortune!

The Staff, throwing away their cigarettes, are all animation now.
Officers and orderlies gallop recklessly down the hill at break-neck
speed. There is a stir amongst those sleeping columns below. Men spring
to their arms. I can hear the harsh words of command, and note the
tricolours with their golden fringes given to the breeze. The long lines
ascend the hill. What has happened? The enemy in front is moving to the
attack: we shall hold the second ridge as we held the first. But no, it
is more than this. This time, as our guns come into action all along the
crest, our infantry do not halt beside them. There is no pause now.
Straight down the slopes they go, the shells screaming overhead, and the
little groups of tirailleurs halting alternately to deliver their biting
volleys. Here, sheltered by a friendly poplar, I can look down upon the
scene. ‘What worthy enemies!’ cries a little surgeon who has joined me.
‘What a struggle of heroes!’ And so it was—while life lasts I shall
never forget De Galliffet’s charge. Sixty thousand men, line after line,
were hurled against the German centre. And how bravely those Germans
fought! And now, looking back in cold blood, how needlessly were they
butchered! Exactly opposite where I stood, their infantry moved forward
with even more than the precision of a parade; in little squads, but
shoulder to shoulder, with all the rigidity of a birthday review. I
could even see the officers halting and actually correcting the
alignment. Needless to say, these living targets were riddled through
and through in the very moment of their pedantic folly. In the rear,
too, came lines of men, gallantly moving forward to beat of drum, with
that extraordinary, high-stepping pace which excites the ridicule of the
Transatlantic visitor in Berlin. How the veterans of our Civil War would
have scoffed at this slave-driver’s discipline! But even the veterans of
the Wilderness and Gettysburg would have admired the bravery of those
devoted Teutons. At 400 yards from each other the two lines came to a
standstill. Very irregular is the front; here the French are giving
back, and here the German officers are driving up their stragglers; all
are standing, there is no cover on that open plain; the French volleys
have dissolved into fierce individual fire, and the masses sway
backwards and forwards in that infernal din. Of a sudden, behind me,
sounds the blare of trumpets and the roll of many a score of drums. De
Galliffet’s reserve is coming up to decide the conflict, and as the
serried lines crowned the ridge, the Germans, battling fiercely in the
valley below, began to break. And then, whilst the setting sun, pouring
his red rays athwart the opposing hosts and striking radiance from the
golden eagles of the tricolours, sank slowly on that awful Aceldama, the
French army moved onward to its triumph. Wild and exulting were the
shouts that rent the air; far above the roar of battle and the clang of
drum and trumpet pealed the maddening cry for vengeance, and like a
tornado—with irresistible strength and order—the young soldiers of the
Republic swept down to obliterate the sorrow and the shame of 1870. Not
for a moment was the issue in doubt. With all the hereditary courage of
their caste, the German officers died in their tracks, disdaining to
give back a single foot; but the Cuirassiers were once more let loose,
the General himself directing their onslaught, and before darkness fell
not a single sound man in the German army but was far upon the road to
Metz. Our victory is complete; as I write, the cavalry is still pushing
the pursuit.




                         THE GENERAL SITUATION.

                       THE LIBERATION OF POLAND.


                                                                 LONDON.

Since the great battles took place which ended in the falling back of
the Russian forces, events have followed in that region which have been
of the utmost importance, though the mere details from day to day have
not been of sufficient interest to chronicle. The Russian army in the
field, unable after its severe losses to oppose the far out-numbering
forces of its enemies, has adopted its traditional policy. It has
retreated into the interior of the country, leaving large garrisons in
Warsaw and Ivangorod. Germany has undertaken the siege of Warsaw,
Austria that of Ivangorod. The German and Austrian cavalry, which have
now asserted their absolute superiority over the Cossacks, have followed
up the retreating Russians far enough to completely separate the Russian
forces to the south of the great marsh region which stretches out behind
the great fortress of Brest-Litewsk from those in the north. A German
army is laying siege to Brest-Litewsk. The single line of railway which
connects that fortress across the marsh has been utterly destroyed for
an immense distance.

Meantime the two Governments, now in complete command of the open
country, have taken a political step which cannot but be received with
satisfaction by the civilised world. They have issued a proclamation
declaring their intention to erect Poland into a buffer State against
the aggressions of Russia, and have pledged themselves not to conclude
peace without guaranteeing its independence. The exact borders of the
restored kingdom have not been fixed, but it is apparently intended to
include Lithuania, and to stretch up to the borders of the marshes.

One important fortress has already fallen. The Germans, taking advantage
of the facilities which the rivers and the railways afforded them, have
brought up heavy siege artillery, with which they have bombarded the
defences of Novo Giorgiewsk. The effect of the cordite shells on parts
of the fortifications which had not been adequately prepared to resist
them, is described as amazing. These terrible instruments of
destruction, now first used in war, are said to have simply swept away
the solid defences of the place. The garrison was helpless, and after a
most gallant but hopeless resistance surrendered.

It appears to be only a question of time, and not a long time, before
the same process is applied to Warsaw. Indeed, the confidence of the
Germans in this respect has put an end to what threatened to be an
appalling tragedy. On leaving General Hashkoff in command at Warsaw,
General Gourko had ordered him to expel the whole civil population of
the town. This measure was adopted, not merely because of the notorious
sympathies of the inhabitants with the invaders, but because Warsaw has
been crowded with such immense numbers of disabled soldiers, and the
place had been filled to such an extent by fugitives at the time when it
was invested, that it was feared that provisions, on which a large
demand had been necessarily made for the army in the field, would not
last long. It was a terrible temptation to the Germans to repeat the
method of the siege of Metz of 1870, and to throw on the Russians the
responsibility for allowing the expelled inhabitants to starve.

Happily, other considerations prevailed. The rapid success at Novo
Giorgiewsk, the complete knowledge that the Germans had of the nature of
the defences with which they had to deal, the great importance of
conciliating the Poles and enlisting them heart and soul in the cause,
all contributed to induce the German authorities to receive the
fugitives.

But there were forty-eight hours of suspense during which the sufferings
of the inhabitants outside the walls, while not yet admitted into the
German camp, were terrible, and their agonising fears still worse. The
matter had to be referred to the Emperor, now in France. A personal
appeal to his humanity by Her Majesty the Queen, most delicately and
cautiously worded, but indirectly suggesting how difficult it would be
to keep together the great Alliance if anything occurred that outraged
the public conscience of Europe and America—and to do him justice, the
real humanity of the Emperor himself—finally decided the question.

The wretched inhabitants were not only received, but carefully looked
after, and at once dispatched to places safe from the clash of arms.
Meantime, enormous numbers of Poles have been enrolled and equipped.
Numbers of both officers and men trained in the Russian Army who have
surrendered, or made good their escape, together with Polish officers
from the Austrian and Prussian Armies serve as an admirable nucleus for
enrolment, so that by the time the Russians are ready to attempt any
advance against their victorious enemies, a new element of considerable
importance will be added to these. A most valuable part of the
contingent of trained Polish officers and soldiers was provided by the
army which surrendered in Bulgaria. Russia has always pursued the policy
of sending her Polish soldiers as far from their homes as possible; the
army invading Bulgaria was, therefore, largely made up of these. They
have gladly transferred their services on hearing of the coming
regeneration of their ancient kingdom.

Meantime, it appears that Russia sees that she has no prospects, for
some time to come, of being able to act offensively against the Allied
Powers, and that they do not intend to favour her by plunging into
Inner-Russia. Stores and transports must be collected in large
quantities before the Russians can again advance, and the impoverished
condition of the country makes this a very difficult task. As, however,
she does not wish to keep her soldiers idle, and is most anxious to
score a success somewhere before she asks for peace, which every day is
becoming more inevitable for her, she has largely reinforced her army in
Asia Minor, which has hitherto been kept inactive by her tremendous
necessities in other directions.

Moukhtar Pasha has been falling back slowly and cautiously, as he found
the forces increasing in his front. Several English officers are with
his army. They speak highly of the efficiency which it has attained, and
indignantly deny that any cruelties have been perpetrated by the regular
Turkish soldiery, though they speak of the Kurds and Bashi-Bazouks as
brutes, whom it is most difficult to keep in any kind of order—men who
are as cowardly as they are brutal, and of whom the army would be well
rid.

Over the movements of the English Army a dead silence has fallen. All
letters whatever, whether of correspondents or others, since the fleet
sailed after the Battle of Kosluji, have been stopped.

We have heard, indeed, of some of the fleet, probably cruisers, being
off Odessa, and some alarm was recently created at Kertch by what was
taken to be a combined expedition against that point. We have, however,
as yet heard of no landing. This cannot last for long. We must get some
news shortly. We know that immense numbers of vessels with stores,
transport, and tools of all sorts have passed Constantinople with sealed
orders to be opened only out of sight of land. Ministers are studiously
reticent, and appeal to the patriotism of both Houses not to put
inconvenient questions. Breathless excitement attends the next move.

Meantime, in France the situation remains nearly as our correspondent
left it. The German armies, after their recent disasters, have been
falling back and concentrating in the Vosges between the fortresses of
Metz and Strasbourg. The French appear to be massing their forces
chiefly in the neighbourhood of Belfort, though a large army has
approached Metz, which is held by too powerful an army to be ignored.
The French are in a state of great exultation and excitement, but
considerable disenchantment has taken place as to the Russian alliance.
They think that Russia has by no means proved the powerful ally they had
expected. It is even no longer treason to say upon the Boulevards that
sympathy with Poland was the ancient policy of France. Till the extent
of their recent successes began to be popularly realised, it was even
suggested that if the Germans would give up Alsace-Lorraine they might
have their buffer State against Russian barbarism. Nay, some were not
afraid to suggest that Germany might, if she would, create two buffer
States on either frontier, a covert hint at the neutralisation of the
Reichsland which a few weeks ago was received with silent assent. There
can be no doubt also that the German people are becoming very weary of a
war which threatens to be of indefinite length on either frontier. The
Emperor, too, despite the successes on the Russian side which were not
gained under his immediate command, has been not a little disillusioned
as to the absolute infallibility of his own military genius.

The Italian forces have been checked by the news of the French
successes, and the fear lest the vast forces now available might be
turned against them.

Thus everywhere on the Continent it is a moment of temporary lull,
though of active preparation for the future.




                 CAPTURE OF SIERRA LEONE BY THE FRENCH.


The letter which we publish from our Correspondent who accompanied the
troops to India, must be preceded by a few words of explanation as to
the circumstances which induced the Government to send a large party of
officers and a small reinforcement of men by the Canadian Pacific route.
That route for Calcutta is a little longer in point of time than the
movement by the Cape. It was recognised from the first that in time of
war it would not be desirable to depend upon the Suez Canal route, but
it had been fully intended to employ the Cape line. Unfortunately,
however, immediately after war was declared by France against us,
communication with Sierra Leone was in some way cut. Some time passed
before we heard what had happened. Then it appeared that, prior to the
declaration of war, the French Governor of Senegal had been warned of
the date at which it was intended in France to declare war, and was
directed to dispatch from Goree a powerful expedition as quietly and
secretly as possible. This, taking advantage of the concentration of the
English fleets in the Baltic and Mediterranean, was to sail from Goree
with sealed orders to be opened at sea, which directed the commanding
Admiral, on a date named, to move straight upon Sierra Leone, and to
attack it on the day that the declaration of war was issued in Europe.

It should be noticed, as a question of method and of the facilities
presented by steam for such operations, that no great gathering of ships
was allowed to attract attention to the preparations in Senegal, and
ship after ship arrived, received its equipment, and departed alone,
with orders to rendezvous on a given day at a stated point in mid-ocean,
fixed by latitude and longitude. In this way, without attracting
attention, and without difficulty, the great fleet was collected, and
moved off at the time named under the orders of the Admiral and General
upon Sierra Leone.

The garrison of Sierra Leone has always been kept at a low ebb, because
of the unhealthiness of the place. It was to have been reinforced in
view of war, but this had been postponed. The movement was a complete
surprise, and though indignant remonstrances appeared in all the English
papers, and in the letter addressed by the Governor of Sierra Leone to
the French Commander-in-Chief, the fact remained that Sierra Leone had,
for the time being, passed into the hands of the French. Although
statements were freely made that such an outrage had never been
committed since the beginning of the world, and most English people
believed them, there was no difficulty in showing that precedents from
the actions of all countries were in favour of the French. However,
apart from the merits of that question, the plain fact of the matter was
that, with Sierra Leone in the hands of the French, our whole route
_viâ_ the Cape to India was seriously disturbed.

The French Fleet in Sierra Leone Harbour and based upon it, threatened
the whole line between St. Vincent and Ascension, and deprived us of the
fortified coaling station which was essential for the supply of steamers
along that route. Though no doubt, in the long-run, Sierra Leone must
fall to the Power which ultimately secures the command at sea, we could
not afford, for some time, to fit out an expedition to retake it. The
Government, therefore, wisely decided, after its capture, to employ the
Canadian Pacific route for the purposes of communication with India and
the East. To Hong-Kong it was already our shortest route. In any case,
it was an absolutely safe one. The one great defect in this mode of
communication consists in the fact that no first-class steamers at
present ply across to Quebec. This, however, was remedied by the
Government chartering for the time one of the best Atlantic liners,
which easily transported the whole of the force, consisting of about 200
officers and 1000 men, chiefly non-commissioned officers, who were to be
sent off to Calcutta.




                            SIEGE OF HERAT.


Events in India had not developed with any great rapidity—in fact, all
those who have studied the question were fully aware that, rapid as has
been the approach of Russia towards India, the two Powers are as yet too
far distant to be able to come into collision in a single campaign. The
first indication of Russian intrigue which reached us was the
announcement that the Ameer had been suddenly murdered, and that general
anarchy had ensued in Afghanistan. The enormous efforts which Russia is
making in other directions appear to have prevented her, so far as we at
present know, from attempting several of the routes by which she might
cross the mountains into Afghanistan. But an advance was immediately
made upon Herat, and the siege of that fortress has been going on for
some time. Fortunately two young English officers, Major Craygrove, and
Captain Greekill, had been employed on some duty for the Government in
the neighbourhood. They immediately threw themselves into Herat, and,
inspiring the garrison with the greatest confidence, have been the life
and soul of the defence ever since. We hear the most amusing accounts of
the mode in which they diversify the rigour of their defence by starting
races of all kinds within the place, and by various other forms of
sport. On the whole, the Russians seem as yet to have made very little
way. The only danger has been lest the English public, excited by the
vigour of the defence, should insist upon an expedition being dispatched
to Herat. For that we are by no means in a condition as yet. The
movement would be a most hazardous one. A force of observation has been
assembled at Quetta, and the whole Indian Army is ready to advance at a
moment’s notice. But it was clearly unadvisable to throw ourselves into
the seething cauldron of Afghanistan whilst the tribes were all fighting
with one another, and no possible ruler had appeared on whose behalf we
could effectually act.

It was under these circumstances that the expedition to Vladivostock was
decided upon, and that the reinforcement of native troops was dispatched
to Egypt. It would have been preposterous to make these detachments from
the army in India had it not very soon become clear that for the first
year of the war, at all events, our position in India must be that of
playing a waiting game. We have assured Russia that we shall on no terms
make peace as long as she holds a foot of Afghan territory. In view of
her failure in Europe, and of the services which we have been able to
render to the Central Powers, the zeal of the Russians in the invasion
of Afghanistan appears to have materially cooled. They begin to see that
whatever successes they may achieve during the course of the campaign,
they are likely to have to surrender their conquests at the end of it.

Nevertheless, as the demands of India for reinforcements of officers and
non-commissioned officers to fill up the various posts which become
necessary when an army is organised for war are very considerable, it
has been a great advantage to us to be able to send out these men by the
new line. Moreover, it is to a certain extent an experiment which shows
how much larger forces could be sent in the event of necessity.




      DISPATCH OF TROOPS BY THE CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY TO INDIA.


                  (_From our Special Correspondent._)

                                      S.S. _Teutonic_, QUEBEC, _June 1_.

[Illustration:

  OUR NEW ROUTE TO INDIA: A SLEEPING-CAR ON THE CANADIAN PACIFIC
    RAILWAY.
]

This magnificent steamer has provided us with the most luxurious
accommodation, and has landed us here in less than six days since we
left England. I am just remaining on board to finish this dispatch to
you, and beyond expressing the satisfaction of all on board with the
treatment we have received from officers and men, and with the
arrangements of the company, I have only one remark of any importance to
make. All who have known the inconveniences and delay which have
hitherto attended the voyage to Canada agree that it is a disgrace to
the Empire that no steamers of the class of the _Teutonic_ are available
to complete the circle of our connection round the world. I have just
been on shore and seen the accommodation which is provided for us by the
Canadian Pacific Railway. Nothing can be more perfect than the
arrangements for the convenience both of officers and men. If only
passengers could start from England and sail here through the splendid
scenery of the St. Lawrence up to this quaint old town, and thence pass
by this excellent railway, there can be no doubt that travellers, to the
East at all events, whether for China, Australia, New Zealand, or even
India, would come this way rather than by New York, or any other line.
As it is, numbers now cross to New York, join the Canadian Pacific by
way of Montreal, and complete their journey in that way to the East. I
can only hope, and I express the wishes of all, that no time may be lost
in establishing, with the aid of a Government subsidy, a really
effective line of steamers from England to Quebec. Here the trains were
drawn up by the side of the steamer. The men marched straight into the
carriages, the baggage, for the transhipment of which large gangs of men
were at hand, was put upon the trains within five hours and fourteen
minutes. Precisely at that interval after the steamer had come
alongside, the first of the three trains employed steamed out of the
station amid the cheers of the crowd which had gathered to see the men
off.

It must be remembered that when the party of Marines and Blue-Jackets,
who were the pioneers of this line among the military forces, came here
in December, they necessarily landed in Halifax. We have, therefore,
saved on that expedition three hundred miles of dreary railway travel by
the Intercolonial Railway.

                                                    VANCOUVER, _June 5_.

We have finished our journey across the continent, and are all as
thoroughly content with our railway trip as with our voyage to Quebec. I
enclose you several sketches which will show you the accommodation
provided for the men, and some of the scenes on the train. What has
interested us most, both in what we have seen and what we have heard at
the different stations that we have stopped at, is the amazing
development which is taking place throughout the whole of this country.

The old Ontario farmers appear to be all on the move farther westwards.
Splendid as is that province they appear to prefer to sell off the farms
they have made at the best rate they can, and to move on to the rich new
lands which are available in the north-west. One hears of men here, who,
with their own hands, having three horses with all sorts of improved
machinery, but no other assistance, have actually sown a hundred acres
of wheat this spring. It is said here that in a very few years this
region will be able to supply a surplus grain crop for England equal to
the surplus product of the whole of the United States.

[Illustration:

  TOMMY ATKINS BARGAINING WITH THE INDIANS ON THE CANADIAN PACIFIC
    RAILWAY.
]

We were naturally a good deal interested in making inquiries about the
prospects of the great railway itself, which has done so much for Canada
and become such an important link between different parts of the Empire.
I came over it with the Governor-General’s party which went down to
British Columbia, soon after the railway was opened. The development of
the country itself, of course, is the first thing that strikes me. Green
fields of corn and comfortable homesteads as far as the eye can reach,
where there was nothing but wild prairie! The trains loaded up with corn
of last year’s crop are still travelling eastwards to Quebec, because it
has not been even yet possible to transport it all, so great is the
accumulation. But no less remarkable were the trains travelling
westwards which we passed at the several stations in our rapid transit,
full of farmers, commercial travellers, and others engaged in the
rapidly developing commerce of the country. Great piles of agricultural
implements and household stuff going westward showed that even in those
parts of the line where the land near the railway has been bought up by
speculators, so that cultivation recedes to some distance from it, rapid
development is taking place.

[Illustration:

  OUR NEW ROUTE TO INDIA: RATIONS ON THE CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY.
]

The next thing that struck me was the immense improvement that has been
steadily effected in the permanent way of the line. Steel bridges
substituted for temporary wooden structures, embankments that have taken
the place of mere tressels, are visible all along the route; and one
sees the work steadily going on. Then gradients have everywhere been
eased and curves lessened, so that the traffic facilities have
marvellously improved. Of course the improvement is most marked over
that part of the line where traffic is heaviest. The great stretch
between Ottawa and Port Arthur is now in most excellent condition. The
work proceeds steadily westward as the traffic necessities call for it.
We are now just about to embark on the _Empress of China_. The
Government had insisted upon two of the Empress steamers being detained
at Victoria for fear accommodation should not be sufficient. But, with
the adaptations made by the company, the _Empress of China_ alone proved
ample, and as it was much more convenient to have the whole party
together, we are all embarking on her.

                                                    CALCUTTA, _June 29_.

We sailed before midnight on the 5th, and have just arrived after a most
successful voyage. The only regret of the captain, which was by no means
shared by any of us, was that at this time of the year he had no chance
of letting us see what a fine seaboat the _Empress of China_ is. He
boasts that the way she weathered some very bad typhoons last year was
splendid. No doubt, from a seaman’s point of view, that may be very
desirable; but we are quite content to have had a June passage over
smooth seas, and with never anything much more than an occasional fresh
breeze. The mail is just leaving, and you will know much more than I do
of what has been going on out here. I hear the siege of Herat is making
little progress, the Russians having had great difficulties in getting
up any heavy artillery.




              CESSATION OF HOSTILITIES—FRANCE AND GERMANY.


                                                    _December 31, 1892._

The Great War has come to an end. The preliminaries of peace have been
signed. We have, therefore, now only to record the events in different
parts of the world which have brought this about. In the first place,
during that lull in the conflict on the Continent which we recorded in
our last reports, for many weeks an almost complete silence fell over
the centre of Europe. Commercial relations, in their modern sense, were
almost entirely suspended.

The German Government, recognising the impossibility of cutting off the
sources of news as long as the telegraphs were used at all, had, for a
great emergency, paralysed all the communications of Europe by stopping
all telegraphic messages along a broad belt extending from the Vistula
to the Rhine, and somewhat beyond those limits. No one knew what was
going on; till suddenly the French forces advancing into Alsace-Lorraine
became aware that the German Armies in their front had almost doubled
their strength.

The Italian Army, warned of the great reinforcement which had taken
place, began to show a formidable and renewed activity. The English
Fleet, completely superior at sea since the victory of Sardinia,
vigorously enforced the blockades of the French Ports. The Belgian
Government now maintained a rigid line of observation along the whole of
its frontier. Similarly Spain exercised a vigilant guardianship over all
communications through the Pyrenees. France, isolated, suffering greatly
from the enormous disturbance caused by the war, and finding her
Generals unable to pursue the successes which had appeared for a moment
to attend her arms, was becoming restless and discontented. The
statesmen at the head of affairs, by no means anxious to see a
successful soldier emerge from the war as their master, far from
interfering with the growth of the popular impression that any further
success was exceedingly problematical, encouraged it secretly in every
way. The Prefects, in fact, had orders to allow no news to circulate
which did not tend to discourage further action. Reports of the
overwhelming strength with which the Germans had inundated the
Reichsland, of the consequent danger of the force at Belfort, were
accompanied by suggestions that France had been betrayed by Russia; that
the great gathering of German troops against France could not have taken
place if Russia had acted with proper vigour on the opposite frontier.
It was thrown out, at first covertly, afterwards more and more openly,
that the moment was not opportune for France to engage Europe
single-handed; that the consequences of any serious disaster might be
fatal to France, and that it would be better to be content with the
laurels which had already been gained, and which had restored the honour
of the French arms. Strasbourg, Metz, and the great fortresses in rear
of them, were represented as likely to prove dangerous obstacles to the
advance of the French Army. As the Generals were obliged to delay
action, this feeling grew, till France on her part was quite in a humour
to make peace if it could be concluded on reasonable terms.

The longing for peace in Germany had also become intense. The great
increase of the force against France had been secured only by the
transfer by rail across Europe of the greater part of the army that had
been employed against Russia. For the moment this was a perfectly safe
operation; the Russian Army was in no condition to act effectively, and
the Austrian Army—with the support of the newly-raised Polish troops,
the Roumanian Army, and the Bulgarians, who, having disposed at length
of the troubles in Macedonia, were ready to lend effective aid to their
allies—was fully competent at least to keep the Russians in check, if
and whenever it should again attempt to advance. Nevertheless the
consciousness in Germany that virtually her whole forces were engaged
against France, and that there was little to spare to resist any
movement that might be made by the Russians, kept up a continual feeling
of anxiety. There appeared to be every prospect that Russia might be
seriously crippled, and prevented from again disturbing the peace of
Europe, if peace could now be speedily made. All these considerations
were for many months telling upon the two chief opponents in the
struggle, during a time when no very exciting events were taking place.




                          ENGLAND AND RUSSIA.

                        ADJUSTMENT IN THE EAST.


In Asia Minor during the same period decisive events had occurred. After
all the preparations at Trebizonde and in the neighbourhood were not so
purely imaginary as the descent of the English Army on Bulgaria had led
us all to suppose. It appears that ever since the beginning of the War a
vast number of labourers, under the direction of English engineer
officers, had been employed in improving the communications between the
neighbourhood of Erzeroum and Trebizonde. Under the protection of
Moukhtar Pasha’s Army, these preparations had gone on from Erzeroum even
during the time when the Black Sea was temporarily abandoned by the
English Fleet. As soon as it was possible to do so, landing-stages had
been multiplied, and other steps taken to improve the facilities for
disembarking at Trebizonde. By the time that the English Army had
finished its little campaign in Bulgaria, all these improvements were so
far advanced that a light railway had been constructed almost throughout
the whole distance, giving the greatest possible facilities for the
accumulation of supplies. Huts had been built, and a series of stations
arranged for the advance of the English Army in successive bodies as
soon as it landed. The landing itself, however, even with all the
improvements made, could not be a very rapid operation. Thus it was
that, as soon as the surrender of the Russian Army was secured, the
portion of the English Army nearest to the coast, and such troops as had
arrived from England too late to join in the campaign, were at once
dispatched direct to Trebizonde. These were followed by others in
regular succession.

The actual disembarkation at Trebizonde occupied about a fortnight,
being interrupted for about four days by a very dangerous gale, which
obliged the troopers to put to sea. During all that time, however, the
movement inland proceeded rapidly, thanks to the arrangements which had
been previously made. The English Army advanced by rapid stages towards
the neighbourhood of Erzeroum, into a position where it was able to
concentrate within half a day’s march of the left flank of the position,
towards which, in a short time, the Turkish Army slowly and deliberately
fell back. The front of the English Army was at right angles to that of
the Turkish, and withdrawn from it some four miles, but there was ample
telegraphic communication between the two forces. A few Turkish scouts
under English officers covered the front of the English. The Russians,
in advancing, drove in such of these scouts as they saw. These retired
as if upon the Turks. Others, withdrawn behind the features of the
ground, were not observed.

The Russians made a mistake not very different from, but much more fatal
than, that which they committed in 1877, when they advanced against
Moukhtar Pasha, ignoring the force that was threatening the
communications of their left wing. In that case Moukhtar had designedly
fallen back in order to facilitate the operations against them of the
Van force. In the present instance he similarly retired in order to
facilitate the aggressive movement of the English Army, of whose
presence within the region of operations they were as little aware as
they had been in 1877 of the approaching arrival of the Van force. They
had much more excuse in the present instance for not knowing of the
existence of the English column, both because all its previous doings
had been completely concealed from them, while the movements of the Van
force in 1877 were known in every intelligence department in Europe, and
also because the English Army had only recently and very rapidly arrived
at the prepared rendezvous. The Russian Army, therefore, finding
Moukhtar Pasha in a position apparently open to attack, and presenting
facilities especially for the turning of his left flank, towards which
all his dispositions tempted them, committed themselves boldly to a
movement in that direction, employing a very large portion of their
force in an extended movement round his left. According to an agreement
between the Turkish Commander and the English General, the Russian Army
was allowed to involve itself for nearly two hours in an apparently very
successful attack upon the centre and left of the Turkish position.

All its movements had been well reported, by help of the dirigible
balloon which had been captured from the Russians in Varna. Lord
Wolseley was therefore able to determine with some accuracy the right
moment for making an attack with his entire strength, first upon the
flank and rear of the right wing of the Russians; and when the latter,
completely surprised and attacked on all sides, because of the
simultaneous advance of the Turks, were broken and thrown into hopeless
disorder, he was able by simply advancing his front to drive the
fugitives in upon the hitherto untouched centre, which in its turn,
assailed in flank by the English Army, and in front by the left wing and
centre of the Turkish, was crushed. Thus the left wing was left a
helpless prey to the armies which now triumphantly occupied the field.

The English Government, made anxious by the protests which had been
directed against a campaign in Asia Minor or the Caucasus, had ordered
Lord Wolseley not to remain more than a month on shore unless in the
very heat of operations at the time. As the crushing defeat of the
Russian Army had left Moukhtar Pasha in absolute command of the whole
field of operations as far as Kars, and as it was exceedingly unlikely
that, after such a defeat, the Russians would be able, in their
exhausted condition, to place another army in the field against him, the
Turkish General was well content to carry on the war for himself. The
English troops, therefore, were simply placed in healthy quarters until
instructions for their future disposition should be received. The
immediate object with which England had engaged in the war having been
secured by the relief of Bulgaria and the defeat of the Russians in Asia
Minor, it was decided to recall the army home. It was considered that a
victorious force, easily made up again to 70,000 strong by home
reinforcements, might become an important element in assisting the
Belgians to bring that additional pressure upon France which might be
necessary in order to ensure the acceptance of satisfactory terms of
peace.

This further blow in Asia Minor, and the exhausted condition of his
country, induced the Czar to make the preliminary proposals for a
general peace. It was very soon found, however, that practically Russia
was isolated—France was thoroughly disenchanted with the alliance.
Russia had attempted too much and too many things at first, and had
consequently suffered everywhere. It was evident that, if on the merits
of the question either of the two allies was to suffer, it was Russia
who would have to pay the piper. The Austrian and German Governments
were too deeply pledged to the Poles, and had too much interest in being
secure from Russian aggression, not to insist definitely upon the
creation of Poland into a buffer State. Though Russia demurred to these
terms as long as she could, the unanimity of the allies in insisting
upon them, and the secret sympathy with Poland of a large proportion of
the French people, obliged her to give way.




                        THE SERVICES OF ENGLAND.


England insisted as a preliminary to all discussion of peace proposals
that the Russians should vacate absolutely all the territory of
Afghanistan, and retire to the previously deliminated frontier. The
services which England had rendered to the Alliance, even as they appear
on the surface of the story, were sufficiently considerable. The
original purpose of Russia had been to attack Bulgaria. Thanks to the
facility with which her fleet had cut the communications of the Russian
Army that landed there, and had limited the force which Russia was able
to employ, it had fallen to the lot of the English to do what no other
army could have done with equal facility, that is, render the necessary
assistance to the Bulgarians, occupied as they had been by the
Macedonian troubles. The facilities for striking right and left
presented by the command of the sea has enabled her to deliver the
second deadly blow in combination with the Turkish army in Asia Minor.

But, apart from the enormous general value which England’s command of
the sea conferred upon the Central Alliance, these were by no means the
only or the most important services which England had directly rendered
towards strengthening the land forces of the Continental powers. Up to
the time of the battle of Sardinia it would have been impossible for the
Italian army to advance against France at all. Her whole coast line,
without the defence of the English fleet, would have been at the mercy,
not only of the French Fleet, but of an expeditionary force of the
French Army; and the Italian Army, in order to be able to meet such an
attack wherever it might be made, must be all kept at home. Now, at the
critical moment, when Germany was hurrying up every man that she could
to the frontier to check the advance of the victorious French, it was
precisely the fact that the whole Italian Army was available to join her
in moving against France, which created that excess of force that France
was not able to resist.

Moreover, it gradually came to be known that, without being aware of it
at the time, the English Fleet in the Baltic had conferred another
all-important service upon Germany on land as much as at sea. It
appeared that the object with which the French and Russian fleets were
endeavouring to clear the Baltic of all German men-of-war was twofold.
In the first place, if they had succeeded, the Russian Fleet was
intended to co-operate with the Russian Army advancing from Kovno in an
attack upon the German defences on the Baltic—Memel, Königsberg, and
Dantzig. But this was not all. There was a considerable Russian force
available at the beginning of the war for which it was impossible to
provide transport and supplies towards the German frontier. This had
been gathered along the Baltic ports of Russia, with a view to its being
transported into Denmark. The Danish Army had been gathered along the
fortified frontier of the kingdom, Denmark having declared herself
neutral in the struggle. As soon as the Russian force had landed and
advanced towards the frontier, the Danish Army would have joined the
Russian. At an opportune moment a declaration would have been issued
simultaneously by France and Russia, setting forth the wrongs which
Germany had inflicted upon Denmark, and declaring that Russia and France
were resolved to see justice done her. A French expeditionary force
formed of troops which could not, in the blocked condition or the
railways (already filled with ample numbers of troops and stores), be
transported from west to east of France, had gathered in the western
ports. This was to be transported as rapidly as possible to reinforce
the Russo-Danish Army. Thus, a large army would have been collected
within the frontiers of Denmark, where it would be completely in rear of
the general line of German defence along the frontier. It might even
threaten, at a time when the German forces were pushed out east and
west, to move upon the unguarded capital of Berlin; or at least to break
up and destroy railways and telegraphs essential to the forces gathered
on the French frontier. All these dangers had been removed by the action
of the English Fleet, which, when joining the German in the Baltic, had
given command to the Central Allies of the sea communications.

Under these circumstances it was not difficult for the English
Government to insist that, as a preliminary to all discussion of peace
negotiations, every Russian soldier should evacuate the territories of
Afghanistan. If the Indian bazaars had been fluttered by the temporary
advance of the Russian Army to Herat, the compensation was ample. The
ignominious withdrawal of the Russian Army was not the less effective
because it was in exact accordance with the proclamation which had been
made at home and in India, at the beginning of the war. Nor did it tell
less on the native mind, because two English officers had alone appeared
to be directly opposed to the might of Russia; while the whole English
Army along the frontier had remained intact, and had not had occasion to
put forth its strength.




                      GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE WAR.


In order to explain our negotiations with France, it is necessary to
give an account of the fate of the Australian expedition against New
Caledonia. The French, fully aware that the expedition had been tardily
sanctioned from home, and forewarned by the noisy preparations which had
preceded its departure, had ordered a powerful fleet, gathered from all
quarters of the Indian and Pacific Oceans, to rendezvous in the
neighbourhood of New Caledonia. The force thus gathered was so superior
to any which the colonists could muster that, in order to avoid being
simply blown out of the water, the expedition had to beat an ignominious
retreat. It was a first point in the negotiations with France for the
Home Government to secure arrangements in reference to Caledonia
satisfactory to the Australian colonists. Indeed, so far as we were
concerned, the restoration of Sierra Leone, and a final and definite
settlement of the Newfoundland Question, were all that we had to demand
in addition to this settlement of the Colonial question.

In the balanced condition of affairs as between Germany and France, it
was obvious that no very material change of frontier was likely to be
made. Germany had no disposition to yield any of the Reichsland; France
was in no position to demand it. Things on that frontier, therefore,
remained very much as they had been, with just this difference, that
France, no longer able to count upon the support of a baffled and
impoverished Russia, was not likely to become aggressive for many years
to come. A general disarmament was discussed, and some steps for
reducing the armaments on all sides were actually adopted. But the
difficulties in the way of any general agreement were too great to admit
of any formal stipulation being recorded in the treaty. The final
ratifications have been delayed until quite recently.

Germany has already set to work to put right any weak points in her
harness. In England the successes which have attended our arms have
glossed over not a few weak points which have been detected in our
organisation. The army, it is obvious, will be allowed to lapse again
into a condition adapted to mere peace parading, despite the vigorous
protests that were addressed by Lord Wolseley at the end of the war to
the Government, against the dangers which must attend such a result. The
country will continue in the belief that everything is for the best in
the best of all possible armies. Prompt reductions in the fleet and army
have been insisted on. These steps have prevented the Central Powers
from entering into an alliance with us for guaranteeing the peace of
Asia and of Europe, for which their experiences of the value of an
effective alliance with England had at first made them very anxious. How
far the future will justify our omission to secure the peace of the
world by taking proper steps to secure it, it is for the experience of
future generations to determine. For the moment, England has been once
more fortunate in the circumstances under which she entered on the war,
in the allies she found in it, and in that increased strength of her
navy for which a recent awakening to her dangers had prepared the way.
The reserves prepared for her army, despite the most fanatic opposition,
have enabled her to place an effective army in the field. Fortunately,
the war has not tested her resources beyond that point. One
comparatively small, though absolutely great, improvement has been made.
Those complaints as to the character of our artillery armament, which
were ignored during peace-time, have been enforced by the experience of
war. Both the Horse Artillery and Field Artillery are to be armed in
accordance with war experience, and not on workshop decisions
unconnected with their actual employment and use.


                                 FINIS.




                               APPENDIX.


                SIR CHARLES TUPPER ON IMPERIAL DEFENCE.

In conversation some months ago with Sir Charles Dilke, he assured me
that he considered the suggestion made in the columns of _Black and
White_ by one of the contributors to the ‘Great War of 1892’—that, in
the event of an imbroglio with India, we might carry our troops by the
American continent—one that was open to much argument. This criticism of
Sir Charles Dilke’s I mentioned to Sir Charles Tupper.

‘Well,’ replied this doughty upholder of Imperial Federation, ‘let us
discuss the whole question, and we will come to Sir Charles’s criticism,
with which I do not at all agree, later on. I was much impressed by the
way in which you fought out your Great War. The case was presented in a
very strong light. Should such a contingency ever arise, the Canadian
Pacific Railway will furnish a most important service to the Empire in
providing a special route to India. As an alternative route to India
under the British flag from end to end, and bringing England as it does
certainly a fortnight nearer to Yokohama than Suez, it evidently may
play a very important part in Imperial policy and defence. As has been
stated in your paper, not only does the Canadian Pacific furnish a
direct line from Quebec on British territory throughout, but in winter,
with the Intercolonial Railway to Quebec, the service is made from ocean
to ocean by a complete line. It has already been greatly used by the
Admiralty. I do not see any force in Sir Charles Dilke’s argument that
mercenaries in the States could be engaged to render the line impassable
in time of war. Of course we assume we are at peace with the States
themselves. We have not only the fact that the line is as capable of
being defended against attack as any line here in England would be which
might be threatened by dynamiters; but Canada would furnish protection
for the line by large bodies of trained militiamen and mounted police in
the North-Western Provinces; and there would be the further co-operation
of the States in the same direction, just as they came to our aid in the
Fenian raids in Canada, when the States heartily seconded us. England
would have the entire force of Canada to help to make the protection of
the line as complete as it would be between Liverpool and London. And
another point is this: By making a _place d’armes_ of Esquimault or
Vancouver you could send forward at a few weeks’ notice any number of
soldiers you required to those two points, and hold them there at a
point as near to India as they are now here, _i.e._ within as easy
striking distance of India as they are in England going by Suez. And you
may always trust to Canadian loyalty in any struggle in which England
might be engaged.’

[Illustration:

  SIR CHARLES TUPPER IN HIS PRIVATE OFFICE IN VICTORIA STREET,
    WESTMINSTER.
]

‘I am glad to hear that,’ said I, ‘for when I was in Washington last
year I heard much talk of the annexation of Canada by America, and of
the pleasure with which the Canadians themselves would receive such a
measure.’

Sir Charles shook his head. ‘I have said repeatedly,’ replied he, ‘that
there is no annexation party in Canada, and I say so again. I mean that
out of the 215 members we send to Parliament not one would be elected if
he declared in favour of American annexation. Mr. Goldwin Smith, with
all his ability, has laboured for twelve years to convince the people of
Canada that it is their inevitable destiny to become part of America. By
his pen, with his tongue, and in the press, he has done all he can to
bring this to pass; and at his own home, Toronto, a highly respectable
and popular man holding Mr. Smith’s views was induced to offer himself
as a candidate at a local election for the Legislature of Ontario, and
out of 9000 votes at the election he only polled 175! No; we are not
within even the remotest distance of an American annexation. How mad it
would be! You do not know what our connection with England really means
to us. Only a short time ago one of the most prominent members of the
United States Government said to me, “The confederation of British North
America under one Government and the construction of the Canadian
Pacific Railway has brought us face to face with a nation.”’

‘Which leads to another point,’ I replied. ‘Is there no chance of Canada
becoming a nation on her own account?’

‘My dear sir,’ replied the High Commissioner, ‘Canada has _all_ to lose
and nothing to gain by becoming independent of England. From being a
very important part of the mightiest Empire in the world, Canada—or
Australia either, for the matter of that—would sink at once, by becoming
independent, into a position in which they would become the easy prey of
those who desired to subjugate them. I would recommend the strengthening
by every practicable means of the bonds that now unite the mother
country and the outlying portions of the Empire. I have proposed in a
recent article in the _Nineteenth Century_ that Australasia and South
Africa should be each united under a central Government, as Canada now
is, and that these three great British dominions should be represented
in London by a leading member of the local Cabinet. You have to take
things as they are, not as you might wish them to be. A Parliamentary
Federation of the Empire, by forming an Imperial Parliament, in which
all these great British possessions should be represented, I regard as
utterly impracticable, because it is in antagonism with the constitution
of this country, and also with the constitution of all the autonomous
Colonies. Therefore I contend that the means of drawing closer the bonds
between the Imperial Government and these great possessions must be
found in some mode consistent with the constitution of England and the
self-government now enjoyed by the Colonies. I come to the conclusion I
have suggested, that the representatives of the three great British
dependencies, being members of the Local Governments, should be made
members of the Imperial Privy Council, and thus be brought into the
closest intercourse and communication with Her Majesty’s Government here
in England, and thus be in a position to give the most hearty and
complete co-operation for the defence of the Empire everywhere. Another
mode to which I attach great importance, and which is quite practicable,
is the adoption of a fiscal policy that would have the effect of placing
the Colonies fiscally in a different position as regards their relations
to Great Britain from that occupied by foreign countries. Such a policy
would lead to the elevation of the Colonies amongst the countries of the
world, to their rapid development, and to a great expansion of trade
between the mother country and them.’

‘Ah!’ said I, ‘doesn’t the kernel of the whole question of Imperial
Federation lie in this Customs difficulty? If we were entirely a Free
Trade empire, there would be little or no difficulty in securing
Imperial Federation. The Union of Hearts, it seems to me, must be
preceded by a Union of Pockets.’

‘Well,’ replied Sir Charles, ‘there is no reason that I can see why
absolute Free Trade should be adopted, and in fact it is impracticable,
or any objection taken to the adoption of the same policy pursued by
every other country in the world with regard to their Colonies, by which
they place their fiscal relations with them on an entirely different
basis from that on which their relations with foreign countries stand;
thus adding to the strong sentimental tie that binds mother and child,
that still stronger tie of mutual self-interest; and the day is not far
distant when a very powerful agitation will be promoted by the artisans
here in England for the adoption of the policy that will most expand the
trade of England, and promote the interests of all who are engaged in
the manufactures of this country.’

‘Then,’ I interjected, ‘you thereby make the working-man the ultimate
Court of Appeal, and he will decide as to whether Imperial Federation is
to become an accomplished fact or not.’

Sir Charles said, ‘Yes; I believe this policy at no distant day will be
sustained by the operatives.’

We drifted into other currents of thought, all bearing on the question
how best to promote a true and lasting Federation. I alluded to a remark
made to me some time since by a distinguished Cabinet Minister on the
fatal policy, not to say the gross injustice, of pitchforking any scion
of nobility, whether fitted for the post or not, into the vice-regal
thrones of the Colonies.

‘Well,’ replied Sir Charles, ‘speaking as a Canadian, I can only say we
have been most fortunate. The policy which has been pursued with us of
sending out a Viceroy of Cabinet rank is, I think, attended with the
greatest possible advantages; first, because it forms a close connection
between the Crown and Canada, and after the period of service is over
these gentlemen bring their great Colonial experience especially to bear
here in England in Parliament, and at the Council, in a manner highly
conducive to the interests of Canada. Canada owes much to the high
standing and character and the abilities of all her governors since it
became a united country.’




                        ‘THE GREAT WAR OF 18—’:


          AN INTERVIEW WITH THE RIGHT HON. SIR CHARLES DILKE.

                         BY RAYMOND BLATHWAYT.

No man in England, few even on the Continent, are better qualified than
Sir Charles Dilke to judge of the merits or demerits of the other
articles which have called forth so much criticism both here and on the
Continent. With him these subjects have been a matter of life-long
study; to their consideration he has devoted all the energies of a
singularly clear and powerful mind. There are few men, even in these
days when the balance of education is so much more even than it used to
be in the past, who have so thoroughly, and from so scientific a point
of view, grasped the great political problems which now confront the
thoughtful men in all civilised nations. The splendid potentialities
that lie within an energetic and resolute Imperialism; the knitting and
welding together of the mother country with her colonies and
dependencies, the accurate knowledge and estimation of the means of
attack and defence that belong respectively to our own country, and to
the great Continental Powers; these and many other of the great
questions, a proper comprehension of which is absolutely essential to
every well-trained, well-furnished statesman, have for many years
received from Sir Charles Dilke the most careful thought and attention.
No English statesmen and few soldiers, even on the Continent, know more
of the relative strength and capacity of foreign armies than this quiet
student and calm observer in Sloane Street.

[Illustration:

  THE RIGHT HON. SIR CHARLES DILKE.
]

To no better authority, therefore, could the clever and interesting
_brochure_ be submitted for judgment and criticism than Sir Charles.

A little older and greyer, a shade more thoughtful and careworn than
when I last saw him some few years ago, upon the occasion of some
political gathering, when he delivered a speech of much brilliance, and
clear, well-defined, consecutive thought, he yet impressed me as he
impressed me then, with a sense of wonderful versatility, and a
plenitude of knowledge of the subject upon which I had come to talk.

‘I feel some little hesitation in replying to your request,’ he began,
‘but since the Editor is evidently anxious that I should do so, I will
endeavour to give you my views as briefly and clearly as I can. Mind
you, I don’t think it is either an easy or a gracious task to criticise
the work of the brilliant staff of experts who have fought this Great
War. Any strictures therefore that I may have to offer will deal
entirely with generalities, or with political and military
considerations; the details of the War seem to me to have been admirably
carried out; and nothing else could have been expected, considering who
are the men who have had part in it. Then, too, I feel that the Editor
was justified, when he wanted to make a war, in making a war which lent
itself to literary and dramatic treatment, instead of the war which
might be more natural but less picturesque. One of my criticisms also
goes to the root of the whole matter, and must necessarily seem a little
by the way. It is that we are assured that a Great War ‘will probably
occur in the immediate future.’ I do not think so, and have indeed,
during all the alarms of the last seventeen years, been an obstinate
believer in the probabilities of peace.’

‘In which the writers clearly differ from you, Sir Charles,’ I replied;
‘I was much struck, however, by the clever manner in which they caused
the war to break out in a small, insignificant country like Bulgaria,
and then spread like a prairie fire, till the whole world was in a
blaze. Do you consider that was a good and probable beginning?’

‘Well,’ replied Sir Charles, as he leaned forward and began to rapidly
sketch out a little map of the Continent, to which he made constant
subsequent reference, ‘it was, perhaps, more ingenious than either
scientific or probable. For my own part, I do not believe that the next
great war, when it does come, will arise from events in the Balkan
Peninsula. Of course, Russia can cause a war whenever she wishes to do
so, but I don’t think she does so wish. The writers of this brochure
state that they have striven to make the imaginary conflict spring from
the most likely source of conflicts. They therefore chose Bulgaria, and
I think with a good deal of reason from their point of view. But, for
all that, Russia has pursued an adventurous and indefensible policy with
regard to these States, and however irritating her conduct may have
been, she means peace at heart. Therefore it is, I think, they are
wrong.’

‘It is quite fair then, Sir Charles, that I should ask you where you
would have applied the match, had you been writing this war?’

‘Quite fair,’ he replied, with a very genial laugh, as he placed his
finger on the Franco-German frontier. ‘The most probable cause of a war,
which I nevertheless think wholly improbable, will be a frontier
incident between Germany and France, exaggerated by the newspapers, and
subject to the difficulty, as between two great Powers of equal strength
and spirit, of making excuses. It is easy for excuses to be made by one
side when there is obvious disparity of strength, and when that side,
whether the stronger or the weaker, does not desire to face the risks of
war; but, as I have pointed out in an article on the French grand
manœuvres of last year, neither side could now make such efforts for
peace as were made by the Emperor William I. a few years ago, when
frontier incidents of the kind to which I allude occurred.’

‘Very good, Sir Charles, your war would obviously have very materially
differed from ours; but now, given the causes of ours, what do you think
of the strategy supposed?’

‘There again,’ was the reply of this keen politician, and endeavour as
best I might I could not puzzle him for a single moment, ‘there again I
have a criticism to offer. I cannot see why Russia should attempt a
descent near Varna, when a descent near Constantinople would so much
better suit her purpose. The garrison of Constantinople is not,
numerically speaking, a strong one. It is very deficient in effective
field artillery, and its infantry, numbering perhaps 18,000 men, could
not make much of a defence, unsupported as they are by a real system of
land fortification, against a Russian rush from the Black Sea coast by
land, accompanied by another landing on the Asiatic side, and a vigorous
naval attack against the Therapia batteries.’

‘Talking of Turkey, Sir Charles, should we be certain of her as an ally
if France joined Russia, and we supported Germany?’

‘By no means,’ was his emphatic reply; ‘although I grant you that actual
temporary circumstances in the Mediterranean would have a great bearing
on their attitude, the Turks would look to the possibilities of the
moment. If we could terrorise them—yes; if not——’ and here my companion
smilingly shook his head.

‘Was _Black and White_ right in sending English troops to Belgium on the
outbreak of a Franco-German war?’ I next asked.

‘I think not,’ slowly replied Sir Charles. ‘It is not likely that public
opinion in England would force the British Government to such a course.
And then again,’ he continued, ‘I think the writers wrong in another
important movement. It seems incredible to me that the Russians should
expose themselves to the three defeats which they met with in your War.
It is much more probable, in my opinion, that when the time comes when
they have to fight the battles described, against the Turks near
Erzeroum, and against the Austrians on the Galician frontier, they will
fight without having the young Emperor William at the same moment in the
field against them. They will fight under conditions which will enable
them to clear the Black Sea coast of the Turks and the Galician plain of
the Austrian forces.’

‘And now, Sir Charles, quitting the storied “War of 189—” for a moment,
I would like to ask you a question or two as to the character of the
warfare of the future, the circumstances under which it will be carried
out, the kind of men best suited for it. Smokeless powder will doubtless
revolutionise all past methods of attack and defence, don’t you think
so? Again, who will be the General of the future—the student Moltke or
the dashing Skobeleff; the politician, the chemist, or the fighter?’

Sir Charles laughed outright as he replied: ‘Rather Moltke than
Skobeleff, but not the politician,—and there is no real political
soldier in France, for instance,—nor the chemist, nor the man of genius;
but the cool-headed man, with plenty of force and of physical strength
to stand the five or six days’ battles which will be the result of
smokeless powder; dash won’t go for much. Few realise the changes that
will be brought about by this smokeless powder. For instance, the
officers will inevitably be picked off. The puzzle to me is how in such
cases vast masses of men will be induced to advance without their
leaders.’

‘And as to the ethical intent of our War?’ I queried, mindful of the
severe strictures passed by worthy, but ultra-timid old ladies of either
sex upon it when its noiseless cannon first disturbed the journalistic
peace of Europe.

‘Oh,’ said Sir Charles, with an easy laugh, ‘I cannot see how your
articles could do anything but good; certainly they have done no
harm—that is, from a moral point of view; but, as regards certain other
aspects of their teaching, I am not quite so certain. I am afraid that
people will say only, “Here are great experts who give us the victory,”
and will imagine, therefore, whatever you may say, that our state of
preparation must be excellent, and our enormous expenditure upon defence
not thrown away. It should be borne in mind that you have given us a
victory in the Mediterranean by procuring for us an Italian alliance;
but that there is, and always must be, a grave risk of our having some
day to find ourselves at war with France, or with France and Russia
without any European alliance, and on questions which do not interest
Continental Powers. Again, the Poland resuscitation is prehistoric. If
you leave out the aristocracy and a few townspeople, there is no part of
the Russian Empire in which the Russian Government is less unpopular
than in Poland, and no Polish force could be collected except one
composed of nobles and that small middle-class which really consists of
the little nobility. The capture of Sierra Leone by France was capital,
for under the present circumstances it would be, of course, inevitable,
and it is well that attention has been so ably called to this point,
which involves grave risk to the Cape route. I cannot think, however,
that the Canadian Pacific route is a very safe one to employ, as our
enemies, by spending a little money in sparsely-settled portions of the
United States, could easily break up the line by bands of hired raiders.
And here my criticisms come to an end. But I would like to say again
that in my opinion the War as conceived by your contributors has been
admirably carried out. With few exceptions, the consequences flow well
and naturally, and in perfect logical sequence from the foundation in
facts.’


    Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to Her Majesty, at the
                      Edinburgh University Press.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed “th  bitterness” to “that bitterness” on p. 6.
 2. Changed “silver of white bone” to “sliver of white bone” on p. 109.
 3. Changed “brought it again to a top” to “brought it again to a stop”
      on p. 217.
 4. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 5. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 6. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 7. Superscripts are denoted by a caret before a single superscript
      character, e.g. M^r.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great War of 189-, by 
P. Colomb and J. F. Maurice and F. N. Maude and Archibald Forbes and Charles Lowe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT WAR OF 189- ***

***** This file should be named 57707-0.txt or 57707-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/7/0/57707/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Camping at Cherry Pond, by Henry Abbott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Camping at Cherry Pond

Author: Henry Abbott

Release Date: December 16, 2010 [EBook #34670]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPING AT CHERRY POND ***




Produced by Linda M. Everhart, Blairstown, Missouri




CAMPING
AT
CHERRY POND

By
HENRY ABBOTT

NEW YORK
1916

Copyright 1916
by
HENRY ABBOTT



CAMPING AT CHERRY POND

We were out of meat. We were not in imminent danger of starvation,
nor indeed of hunger, but were reduced to what might be called a
vegetable diet, and not a great variety of that. Bige and I discussed
the situation while we ate our frugal evening meal of flapjacks,
maple syrup, and onions. We had eaten onions, syrup, and flapjacks
for luncheon, and syrup, onions, and flapjacks for breakfast that
same day. The last of our stock of bacon had been consumed
twenty-four hours earlier, and the last of our eggs had served as
part of breakfast on the morning of the previous day. Our fresh meat
had disappeared five days before, and the potato bag was empty. We
had some coffee and plenty of spring water. The flapjacks were good,
but we were not quite happy. There was a lot of sameness in our diet,
which was far from agreeable, and we now were considering ways and
means.

I suppose it is due to the perversity of the human animal that he
craves what is sometimes called a "balanced ration." We were both
fond of flapjacks, and likewise of onions. There is nothing quite so
satisfying as onions, cooked over and eaten by the camp fire; but
onions three times a day, and day after day--well, I suppose it would
have been just as bad if we had been sentenced to eat ice cream for a
steady diet. I seem to recall that we had, in our Sunday-school days,
the authority of the Good Book for the statement that the Israelites
went on a strike because they were obliged to eat quail three times a
day for a long while.

Bige and I were living at the Cherry Pond Camp. We had gone over
there to hunt deer, and had taken in with us, ten days previously,
what we considered a good supply of food; but then, we had counted on
shooting a deer and expected to have venison to add to our cuisine.
Of course we could have gone back to Brown's hotel and gotten some
more food, but Deerland Lodge was ten miles away; besides, the people
there would have laughed at us if we had returned empty-handed. We
were expected to bring "meat" back with us, but luck had been against
us.

There were plenty of fish in Cherry Pond. We had caught them there
many times, but at the time of which I write the season was closed
for both speckled and lake trout, and, moreover, we had brought no
fishing tackle, so a fish diet was out of the discussion.

It was early October, and the deer-hunting season had opened on the
first day of the month. We had come to hunt deer, but we had no
thought of taking a mean advantage of the deer or of violating the
game law by hunting him at night along the shores of the pond with a
jack light. That would have been too easy, and in our opinion little
short of murder. We proposed to be sporty and practice only the
"still-hunting" method. That would give the deer long odds and, so to
speak, a running chance for his life. Under the prevailing conditions
the chances were indeed about twenty to one in his favor.

  [Illustration: The Cherry Pond Camp]

In still hunting one must sneak through the woods, making no sound
and as little motion as possible. Preferably one should also hunt "up
wind," but this is not always possible. The deer has been provided
with a pair of very large ears capable of collecting the sound made
by a breaking twig many rods away; and his sense of smell is so keen
as to telegraph to his brain the human scent and warn him of the
approach of his hereditary enemy long before he is within range of
vision. It is also the habit of the deer, when lying down, to take
such a position that he can keep his eye on his own back track, while
he has in effect "his ear to the ground."

At this time the leaves had just begun to fall, and there had been no
rain for many days, so when one walked through the woods the leaves
rustled, and dried twigs and branches snapped, making the forest
"noisy."

There were many deer living in the vicinity of Cherry Pond. We had
seen tracks and other signs of their presence, but on the few
occasions when we saw a deer it was usually only the flash of his
white tail as he jumped from behind a clump of bushes and disappeared
behind a rock or other screen. Twice we took snap shots, and in each
instance the bullet, we found, was imbedded in a tree trunk that the
deer had succeeded in placing between the gun and himself at the
first running jump. I had also sat many hours on logs watching
runways while Bige tramped around a hill or over a mountain to drive
a deer past my watch station. On one occasion when I heard a deer
coming and was all ready to shoot, he evidently suspected danger,
crossed over to another parallel runway, and passed without coming
into view.

We had traveled many miles in our hunt, had been over Panther
Mountain and Eagle Mountain, had been up Beaver River Valley, and had
visited Pickwocket Pond and Muskrat City. We had hunted carefully and
patiently, but had each night gone back to camp without meat, and the
situation was becoming serious.

Cherry Pond, so named because of the quantities of wild cherries that
grow near it, was one of our favorite camping places, and we had
spent more or less time there every year for the past fifteen years,
both during the fishing and hunting seasons. Many a fine trout has
found his ultimate destiny in our frying pan over the Cherry Pond
camp fire.

Bige and I had built an open log camp there: one of the type called a
"lean-to." It is so named because it leans to or against nothing. In
other words, the camp has three sides, a sloping roof, an overhanging
or projecting hood, and a fireplace built of stone in front. This
type of camp can be made very comfortable except in cold winter
weather, and in it one can be sure of plenty of fresh air. Some of
the enclosed log cabins we have built are not so well ventilated and
are liable to be close and stuffy.

  [Illustration: The Dining Room]

We had a lot of fun in building this camp. It was substantially made,
and with a few repairs to the roof has sheltered us for twelve years.

The first step in building a camp is to look for a spring of good
pure water. In this case, after searching for several days and
failing to find one, we selected a spot where the lay of the land
indicated that a spring ought to be and dug for it. We found about
three feet below the surface a vein of ice water that has never
failed in the driest season.

Next, we selected a spot on top of a knoll about fifty feet above the
surface of the pond and two hundred feet away from it, where we
staked out our foundation. This elevation put us above the fog and
damp air which settle down on the water at night.

Then we proceeded to make a set of drawings and specifications such
as would be made in building a house. The logs and roof timbers were
cut and fitted to specification before they were carried to position.
The ground plan was twelve by eight feet. The ridge pole was nine
feet high. The hood projected two feet, and was seven feet above
ground. The walls were made of spruce logs, and were five feet high.
The bottom log was ten inches in diameter; others graduated in size
up to five inches at the top. Rafters were placed four inches apart;
these and other roof timbers were made of spruce saplings two to
three inches in diameter; and the roof and gable ends were covered
with tar-paper, the roof projecting one foot beyond the walls all
around to keep the outside of logs dry. Cracks between the logs were
calked with dry moss.

On the ground, across the front, we placed a log ten inches in
diameter, and another of the same size parallel to it at the rear.
Across these two logs from front to rear we placed birch saplings one
and one-half inches in diameter at the butt. These poles were
selected with some care to have them straight, and they were placed
one-half inch apart, butts to the front; and a single wire nail
fastened each pole to the front log and kept it in position. The
small ends of poles were left free to slide on the rear log when
bent. On top of this birch gridiron we made our bed of balsam boughs.
The result was as comfortable a spring bed as one can buy at a
furniture house.

We built a cupboard at one end of the shack in which to store our
food, and it was eaten up by porcupines and rebuilt the second time
before we learned to cover the boards with tin. Also, after one table
had been chewed up by the animals, we suspended the new one with wire
from the roof of the camp on leaving, and since then have found it in
good condition when we returned.

The camp afforded sleeping space for three or four persons. On
occasions when we had several guests we would set up a tent in the
back yard.

From time to time we made improvements; for example, we built a
pavilion to cover the dining table so that in rainy weather we were
not obliged to eat our meals on the bed.

One day during the hunt we came upon signs of bear only a few rods
from the camp, and the tracks and other evidence of his presence were
fresh. He had not been gone more than a few minutes when we arrived.
The black bear of our forests is very fond of cherries and other
fruits. The wild cherries of these woods are of a superior variety.
They are much larger and sweeter than the ordinary type of choke (or
pin) cherry. They are black and have a bitter-sweet flavor. We often
eat them, but they are best used in making "cherry bounce."

The bear will gorge himself on these cherries, and he is no
conservationist. He climbs a tree if it is a large one and breaks off
all the branches. If it happens to be a small tree, he will tear it
down and break it limb from limb, or he may pull it up by the roots,
thus destroying the crop for another year. The bear is a typical
American.

On another day we decided to suspend hunting operations and go over
to Otter Pond, about a mile away, to inspect the lumber operations of
a colony of beavers that live there; so we left our guns in camp, and
Bige carried a boat over the trail, while I took my camera.

Just as we emerged from the woods we saw on the shore of Otter Pond,
quietly browsing and about seventy-five yards away, a big buck deer
having five prongs on each horn.

"Gosh!" said Bige.

We looked at him some minutes before he discovered our presence and
loped off into the woods. It was as fine a shot as we shall ever have
if we hunt the balance of our lives, but our guns were a mile away.

While paddling across the pond and near an island we heard a
squeaking sound such as a lot of mice might make. Stopping the boat
to listen, we soon saw, on a partly sunken log, six young mink. They
were about the size of kittens when a week old. We sat quietly
watching them a few minutes, when the mother mink came to the surface
with a trout about five inches long in her mouth. She swam to the log
and laid the fish on it, when the little ones scrambled for it,
tearing it into shreds in a jiffy. They fought over the last scrap
while the mother mink dove under the water again, and we continued
across the pond to the beaver house which was on the opposite shore.

  [Illustration: The Beaver House]

This beaver house was made of sticks of wood of varying size fastened
together by mud. It was cone-shaped and placed on the bank with one
edge in the water. It was about fifteen feet in diameter at the base
and seven feet high at the center. There were five separate canals or
ditches sunk below the bottom of the pond, all entering the house
under its base and about four feet below the surface of the water.
These allowed the beaver entrance and exit when the ice was very
thick in winter.

We stopped our boat alongside, pounded on the roof with the paddle
and waited for a response. We heard a murmur of beaver talk inside,
and in two or three minutes there came a sudden splash directly
behind us and a shower of water poured over my head and down the back
of my neck. The grandfather beaver, the largest of his tribe, had
come out through one of the cellar passages, under the boat, had come
to the surface behind us, had lifted his tail, which was as broad and
flat as Bige's paddle, and slapped the water with it, throwing spray
at least six feet into the air. When I caught sight of him he was in
the act of diving, but he presently came to the surface again, about
fifty feet away, and started swimming toward the opposite shore. I
wanted his portrait for my collection, so we went paddling after him.
Five or six times we got near enough to focus the camera on him and
press the button at just the instant when he slapped the water and
dove under. The result was a half-dozen pictures of fountains but no
beaver.

  [Illustration: A Beaver Fountain]

We were now a half-mile away from the house up the pond and for the
first time realized that we were victims of a perfidious beaver
trick. His sole purpose was, clearly, to allure us as far away from
his house and his family as possible, and he had won.

About fifteen years previously a fire had burned over nearly a
hundred acres of forest on the northern shore of Otter Pond, and this
was now grown up with poplar and white-birch saplings. The bark of
both these trees is used as food by the beavers, and they were now
busily at work cutting down, clearing away, and storing for winter
use this second growth of timber.

Unlike the bear. Brother Beaver is very thorough and economical in
his operations. Nothing is wasted. He cuts down a tree with his
chisel-shaped teeth, takes out a chip just such as comes from a
lumberman's ax, cuts the tree into approximately four-foot lengths,
trims out the branches, and carries away every scrap of it, even the
small twigs. Nothing is left where the tree fell but stump and chips.
What is not required for immediate use is piled up _under water_ to
keep the bark soft and fresh for winter consumption. And when he has
peeled and eaten the bark from a stick, he saves that stick for use
in enlarging his house or in repairing his dam.

At one corner of the pond was a swampy place through which a system
of canals had been dug, down which the lumber might be floated to the
open water on the way to the storage place. There were also roadways
on the hillside, cleared and smooth, down which hundreds of sticks
had been dragged to the water. About ten acres had been thoroughly
cleared, and there were signs of activity on every hand, but most of
the actual work was done at night. The beaver was the pioneer civil
engineer of the American continent. At Otter Pond he had repaired and
rebuilt a dam which had been used by a lumber company twenty years
before.

  [Illustration: The Dutch Oven]

To return to the discussion at our evening meal of the meat famine:
Bige said that if we would get up early in the morning, long before
sunrise, and go across the pond and up into the mouth of Fox River,
we should find deer feeding there on the yellow pond lilies and
button grass. We would have to find a hiding place before it got
light, as the deer seldom stayed long at the water after sunrise.

So in the chill and shivery hours of the following morning we were on
our way, I in the bow of the boat headed forward with my Winchester
across my knees, and Bige operating a "still paddle" at the stern. By
this method the paddle is not lifted out of the water; it is merely
turned in the water so that the sharp edge of the blade is presented
on moving it forward and the broad side is against the water on
pushing it back. No ripple is made, or other sound, and the boat
moves forward like a ghost through the darkness. A dense fog had
settled down near the water, but it was clear overhead.

Groping along the opposite shore through the fog, we made our way
finally into the mouth of Fox River and immediately heard a great
splashing and sloshing just ahead. It sounded as if a lot of cattle
might be wading across the stream, but we could see nothing but fog.
Bige whispered from the other end of the boat: "There's a whole herd
of them; pick the one with the biggest horns." I cocked my rifle so
as to be ready for a quick shot, while Bige pulled the boat up along
shore behind an overhanging wild-rose bush, and we waited with nerve
and muscle tense. The splashing continued for what seemed a long
time. Finally the rising sun crept over the hilltop and the fog
rolled slowly up like a proscenium curtain in a theater and
disclosed, at a distance of about thirty yards, a doe standing in the
shallow water and quietly eating button grass, while two spotted
fawns were playing tag, racing up and down, splashing water in every
direction. With head and tail erect they would run about, kicking up
their heels and snorting like a lot of calves at play in a barnyard.

  [Illustration: One of the Partridges]

This was a show worth the price of admission, and we sat and watched
it for fully ten minutes, when a shifting breeze apparently carried
our scent to the mother, who instantly sounded a note of warning, and
the family party quickly disappeared through the brush into the tall
timber, and we paddled back across Cherry Pond to our breakfast of
flapjacks, syrup, and onions.

As we approached the landing place it occurred to me that the hammer
of my gun was still up, and that the gun had not been lifted from my
knees during the entire performance. As I let the hammer down and
removed the cartridge from the barrel, I was conscious of a sense of
relief that nothing had occurred to disturb the pleasant relations of
the happy family.

After breakfast I went over on the Wolf Mountain tote road and shot
four fine fat partridges. That night we had roast partridge for
dinner. Have you ever eaten partridge that had been roasted in a
Dutch oven before a camp fire? Well, say! "Jes take and have 'em
stuffed with onions, baste 'em well, and roast 'em brown with a lot
of gravy."



END OF CAMPING AT CHERRY POND





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Camping at Cherry Pond, by Henry Abbott

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPING AT CHERRY POND ***

***** This file should be named 34670.txt or 34670.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/7/34670/

Produced by Linda M. Everhart, Blairstown, Missouri

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Project Gutenberg's The Common People of Ancient Rome, by Frank Frost Abbott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Common People of Ancient Rome
       Studies of Roman Life and Literature

Author: Frank Frost Abbott

Release Date: August 19, 2004 [EBook #13226]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMON PEOPLE OF ANCIENT ROME ***




Produced by Distributed Proofreaders




[Transcriber's note: This book makes use of the Roman denarius symbol.
Because this symbol is not available in Unicode, it has been replaced by
the ROMAN NUMERAL TEN (U+2169) with a COMBINING LONG STROKE OVERLAY
(U+0336) in the UTF-8 version.]




The Common People of Ancient Rome

Studies of Roman Life and Literature

By

Frank Frost Abbott

Kennedy Professor of the Latin Language and Literature in Princeton
University

New York
Charles Scribner's Sons




Copyright, 1911, by
Charles Scribner's Sons


Printed in the United States of America




Dedicated to J. H. A.




Prefatory Note



This book, like the volume on "Society and Politics in Ancient Rome,"
deals with the life of the common people, with their language and
literature, their occupations and amusements, and with their social,
political, and economic conditions. We are interested in the common people
of Rome because they made the Roman Empire what it was. They carried the
Roman standards to the Euphrates and the Atlantic; they lived abroad as
traders, farmers, and soldiers to hold and Romanize the provinces, or they
stayed at home, working as carpenters, masons, or bakers, to supply the
daily needs of the capital.

The other side of the subject which has engaged the attention of the
author in studying these topics has been the many points of similarity
which arise between ancient and modern conditions, and between the
problems which the Roman faced and those which confront us. What policy
shall the government adopt toward corporations? How can the cost of living
be kept down? What effect have private benefactions on the character of a
people? Shall a nation try to introduce its own language into the
territory of a subject people, or shall it allow the native language to be
used, and, if it seeks to introduce its own tongue, how can it best
accomplish its object? The Roman attacked all these questions, solved some
of them admirably, and failed with others egregiously. His successes and
his failures are perhaps equally illuminating, and the fact that his
attempts to improve social and economic conditions run through a period of
a thousand years should make the study of them of the greater interest and
value to us.

Of the chapters which this book contains, the article on "The Origin of
the Realistic Romance among the Romans" appeared originally in _Classical
Philology_, and the author is indebted to the editors of that periodical
for permission to reprint it here. The other papers are now published for
the first time.

It has not seemed advisable to refer to the sources to substantiate every
opinion which has been expressed, but a few references have been given in
the foot-notes mainly for the sake of the reader who may wish to follow
some subject farther than has been possible in these brief chapters. The
proofs had to be corrected while the author was away from his own books,
so that he was unable to make a final verification of two or three of the
citations, but he trusts that they, as well as the others, are accurate.
He takes this opportunity to acknowledge his indebtedness to Dr. Donald
Blythe Durham, of Princeton University, for the preparation of the index.

Frank Frost Abbott.
Einsiedeln, Switzerland
_September 2, 1911_




Contents



How Latin Became the Language of the World
The Latin of the Common People
The Poetry of the Common People of Rome:
  I. Their Metrical Epitaphs
 II. Their Dedicatory and Ephemeral Verses
The Origin of the Realistic Romance Among the Romans
Diocletian's Edict and the High Cost of Living
Private Benefactions and Their Effect on the Municipal Life of the Romans
Some Reflections on Corporations and Trade-Guilds
A Roman Politician, Gaius Scribonius Curio
Gaius Matius, a Friend of Cæsar

Index




The Common People of Ancient Rome




How Latin Became the Language of the World



How the armies of Rome mastered the nations of the world is known to every
reader of history, but the story of the conquest by Latin of the languages
of the world is vague in the minds of most of us. If we should ask
ourselves how it came about, we should probably think of the world-wide
supremacy of Latin as a natural result of the world-wide supremacy of the
Roman legions or of Roman law. But in making this assumption we should be
shutting our eyes to the history of our own times. A conquered people does
not necessarily accept, perhaps it has not commonly accepted, the tongue
of its master. In his "Ancient and Modern Imperialism" Lord Cromer states
that in India only one hundred people in every ten thousand can read and
write English, and this condition exists after an occupation of one
hundred and fifty years or more. He adds: "There does not appear the
least prospect of French supplanting Arabic in Algeria." In comparing the
results of ancient and modern methods perhaps he should have taken into
account the fact that India and Algeria have literatures of their own,
which most of the outlying peoples subdued by Rome did not have, and these
literatures may have strengthened the resistance which the tongue of the
conquered people has offered to that of the conqueror, but, even when
allowance is made for this fact, the difference in resultant conditions is
surprising. From its narrow confines, within a little district on the
banks of the Tiber, covering, at the close of the fifth century B.C., less
than a hundred square miles, Latin spread through Italy and the islands of
the Mediterranean, through France, Spain, England, northern Africa, and
the Danubian provinces, triumphing over all the other tongues of those
regions more completely than Roman arms triumphed over the peoples using
them.

In tracing the story we must keep in our mind's eye the linguistic
geography of Italy, just as we must remember the political geography of
the peninsula in following Rome's territorial expansion. Let us think at
the outset, then, of a little strip of flat country on the Tiber, dotted
here and there with hills crowned with villages. Such hill towns were
Rome, Tusculum, and Præneste, for instance. Each of them was the
stronghold and market-place of the country immediately about it, and
therefore had a life of its own, so that although Latin was spoken in all
of them it varied from one to the other. This is shown clearly enough by
the inscriptions which have been found on the sites of these ancient
towns,[1] and as late as the close of the third century before our era,
Plautus pokes fun in his comedies at the provincialism of Præneste.

The towns which we have mentioned were only a few miles from Rome. Beyond
them, and occupying central Italy and a large part of southern Italy, were
people who spoke Oscan and the other Italic dialects, which were related
to Latin, and yet quite distinct from it. In the seaports of the south
Greek was spoken, while the Messapians and Iapygians occupied Calabria. To
the north of Rome were the mysterious Etruscans and the almost equally
puzzling Venetians and Ligurians. When we follow the Roman legions across
the Alps into Switzerland, France, England, Spain, and Africa, we enter a
jungle, as it were, of languages and dialects. A mere reading of the list
of tongues with which Latin was brought into contact, if such a list could
be drawn up, would bring weariness to the flesh. In the part of Gaul
conquered by Cæsar, for instance, he tells us that there were three
independent languages, and sixty distinct states, whose peoples doubtless
differed from one another in their speech. If we look at a map of the
Roman world under Augustus, with the Atlantic to bound it on the west, the
Euphrates on the east, the desert of Sahara on the south, and the Rhine
and Danube on the north, and recall the fact that the linguistic
conditions which Cæsar found in Gaul in 58 B.C. were typical of what
confronted Latin in a great many of the western, southern, and northern
provinces, the fact that Latin subdued all these different tongues, and
became the every-day speech of these different peoples, will be recognized
as one of the marvels of history. In fact, so firmly did it establish
itself, that it withstood the assaults of the invading Gothic, Lombardic,
Frankish, and Burgundian, and has continued to hold to our own day a very
large part of the territory which it acquired some two thousand years
ago.

That Latin was the common speech of the western world is attested not only
by the fact that the languages of France, Spain, Roumania, and the other
Romance countries descend from it, but it is also clearly shown by the
thousands of Latin inscriptions composed by freeman and freedman, by
carpenter, baker, and soldier, which we find all over the Roman world.

How did this extraordinary result come about? It was not the conquest of
the world by the common language of Italy, because in Italy in early days
at least nine different languages were spoken, but its subjugation by the
tongue spoken in the city of Rome. The traditional narrative of Rome, as
Livy and others relate it, tells us of a struggle with the neighboring
Latin hill towns in the early days of the Republic, and the ultimate
formation of an alliance between them and Rome. The favorable position of
the city on the Tiber for trade and defence gave it a great advantage over
its rivals, and it soon became the commercial and political centre of the
neighboring territory. The most important of these villages, Tusculum,
Præneste, and Lanuvium, were not more than twenty miles distant, and the
people in them must have come constantly to Rome to attend the markets,
and in later days to vote, to hear political speeches, and to listen to
plays in the theatre. Some of them probably heard the jests at the expense
of their dialectal peculiarities which Plautus introduced into his
comedies. The younger generations became ashamed of their provincialisms;
they imitated the Latin spoken in the metropolis, and by the second
century of our era, when the Latin grammarians have occasion to cite
dialectal peculiarities from Latium outside Rome, they quote at
second-hand from Varro of the first century B.C., either because they will
not take the trouble to use their own ears or because the differences
which were noted in earlier days had ceased to exist. The first stage in
the conquest of the world by the Latin of Rome comes to an end, then, with
the extension of that form of speech throughout Latium.

Beyond the limits of Latium it came into contact with Oscan and the other
Italic dialects, which were related to Latin, but of course were much
farther removed from it than the Latin of Tusculum or Lanuvium had
been,[2] so that the adoption of Latin was not so simple a matter as the
acceptance of Roman Latin by the villages of Latium near Rome had been.

The conflict which went on between Latin and its Italic kinsmen is
revealed to us now and then by a Latin inscription, into which Oscan or
Umbrian forms have crept.[3] The struggle had come to an end by the
beginning of our era. A few Oscan inscriptions are found scratched on the
walls of Pompeii after the first earthquake, in 63 A.D., but they are late
survivals, and no Umbrian inscriptions are known of a date subsequent to
the first century B.C.

The Social War of 90-88 B.C., between Rome and the Italians, was a
turning-point in the struggle between Latin and the Italic dialects,
because it marks a change in the political treatment of Rome's
dependencies in Italy. Up to this time she had followed the policy of
isolating all her Italian conquered communities from one another. She was
anxious to prevent them from conspiring against her. Thus, with this
object in view, she made differences in the rights and privileges granted
to neighboring communities, in order that, not being subject to the same
limitations, and therefore not having the same grievances, they might not
have a common basis for joint action against her. It would naturally be a
part of that policy to allow or to encourage the retention by the several
communities of their own dialects. The common use of Latin would have
enabled them to combine against her with greater ease. With the conclusion
of the Social War this policy gave way before the new conception of
political unity for the people of Italian stock, and with political unity
came the introduction of Latin as the common tongue in all official
transactions of a local as well as of a federal character. The immediate
results of the war, and the policy which Rome carried out at its close of
sending out colonies and building roads in Italy, contributed still more
to the larger use of Latin throughout the central and southern parts of
the peninsula. Samnium, Lucania, and the territory of the Bruttii suffered
severely from depopulation; many colonies were sent into all these
districts, so that, although the old dialects must have persisted for a
time in some of the mountain towns to the north of Rome, the years
following the conclusion of the Social War mark the rapid disappearance of
them and the substitution of Latin in their place. Campania took little
part in the war, and was therefore left untouched. This fact accounts
probably for the occurrence of a few Oscan inscriptions on the walls of
Pompeii as late as 63 A.D.

We need not follow here the story of the subjugation of the Greek seaports
in southern Italy and of the peoples to the north who spoke non-Italic
languages. In all these cases Latin was brought into conflict with
languages not related to itself, and the situation contains slightly
different elements from those which present themselves in the struggle
between Latin and the Italic dialects. The latter were nearly enough
related to Latin to furnish some support for the theory that Latin was
modified by contact with them, and this theory has found advocates,[4] but
there is no sufficient reason for believing that it was materially
influenced. An interesting illustration of the influence of Greek on the
Latin of every-day life is furnished by the realistic novel which
Petronius wrote in the middle of the first century of our era. The
characters in his story are Greeks, and the language which they speak is
Latin, but they introduce into it a great many Greek words, and now and
then a Greek idiom or construction.

The Romans, as is well known, used two agencies with great effect in
Romanizing their newly acquired territory, viz., colonies and roads. The
policy of sending out colonists to hold the new districts was definitely
entered upon in the early part of the fourth century, when citizens were
sent to Antium, Tarracina, and other points in Latium. Within this century
fifteen or twenty colonies were established at various points in central
Italy. Strategic considerations determined their location, and the choice
was made with great wisdom. Sutrium and Nepete, on the borders of the
Ciminian forest, were "the gates of Etruria"; Fregellæ and Interamna
commanded the passage of the river Liris; Tarentum and Rhegium were
important ports of entry, while Alba Fucens and Carsioli guarded the line
of the Valerian road.

This road and the other great highways which were constructed in Italy
brought not only all the colonies, but all parts of the peninsula, into
easy communication with the capital. The earliest of them was built to
Capua, as we know, by the great censor Appius Claudius, in 312 B.C., and
when one looks at a map of Italy at the close of the third century before
our era, and sees the central and southern parts of the peninsula dotted
with colonies, the Appian Way running from Rome south-east to Brundisium,
the Popillian Way to Rhegium, the Flaminian Way north-east to Ariminum,
with an extension to Cremona, with the Cassian and Aurelian ways along the
western coast, the rapidity and the completeness with which the Latin
language overspread Italy ceases to be a mystery. A map of Spain or of
France under the Empire, with its network of roads, is equally
illuminating.

The missionaries who carried Roman law, Roman dress, Roman ideas, and the
Latin language first through central, southern, and northern Italy, and
then to the East and the West, were the colonist, the merchant, the
soldier, and the federal official. The central government exempted the
Roman citizen who settled in a provincial town from the local taxes. As
these were very heavy, his advantage over the native was correspondingly
great, and in almost all the large towns in the Empire we find evidence of
the existence of large guilds of Roman traders, tax-collectors, bankers,
and land-owners.[5] When Trajan in his romantic eastern campaign had
penetrated to Ctesiphon, the capital of Parthia, he found Roman merchants
already settled there. Besides the merchants and capitalists who were
engaged in business on their own account in the provinces, there were
thousands of agents for the great Roman corporations scattered through the
Empire. Rome was the money centre of the world, and the great stock
companies organized to lend money, construct public works, collect taxes,
and engage in the shipping trade had their central offices in the capital
whence they sent out their representatives to all parts of the world.

The soldier played as important a part as the merchant in extending the
use of Latin. Tacitus tells us that in the reign of Augustus there were
twenty-five legions stationed in the provinces. If we allow 6,000 men to a
legion, we should have a total of 150,000 Roman soldiers scattered through
the provinces. To these must be added the auxiliary troops which were made
up of natives who, at the close of their term of service, were probably
able to speak Latin, and when they settled among their own people again,
would carry a knowledge of it into ever-widening circles. We have no exact
knowledge of the number of the auxiliary troops, but they probably came to
be as numerous as the legionaries.[6] Soldiers stationed on the frontiers
frequently married native women at the end of their term of service,
passed the rest of their lives in the provinces, and their children
learned Latin.

The direct influence of the government was no small factor in developing
the use of Latin, which was of course the official language of the Empire.
All court proceedings were carried on in Latin. It was the language of
the governor, the petty official, and the tax-gatherer. It was used in
laws and proclamations, and no native could aspire to a post in the civil
service unless he had mastered it. It was regarded sometimes at least as a
_sine qua non_ of the much-coveted Roman citizenship. The Emperor
Claudius, for instance, cancelled the Roman citizenship of a Greek,
because he had addressed a letter to him in Latin which he could not
understand. The tradition that Latin was the official language of the
world was taken up by the Christian church. Even when Constantine presided
over the Council at Nicæa in the East, he addressed the assembly in Latin.

The two last-mentioned agencies, the Latin of the Roman official and the
Latin of the church, were the influences which made the language spoken
throughout the Empire essentially uniform in its character. Had the Latin
which the colonist, the merchant, and the soldier carried through Italy
and into the provinces been allowed to develop in different localities
without any external unifying influence, probably new dialects would have
grown up all over the world, or, to put it in another way, probably the
Romance languages would have come into existence several centuries before
they actually appeared. That unifying influence was the Latin used by the
officials sent out from Rome, which all classes eagerly strove to imitate.
Naturally the language of the provinces did not conform in all respects to
the Roman standard. Apuleius, for instance, is aware of the fact that his
African style and diction are likely to offend his Roman readers, and in
the introduction to his _Metamorphoses_ he begs for their indulgence. The
elder Seneca in his _Controversiae_ remarks of a Spanish fellow-countryman
"that he could never unlearn that well-known style which is brusque and
rustic and characteristic of Spain," and Spartianus in his Life of Hadrian
tells us that when Hadrian addressed the senate on a certain occasion, his
rustic pronunciation excited the laughter of the senators. But the
peculiarities in the diction of Apuleius and Hadrian seem to have been
those which only a cultivated man of the world would notice. They do not
appear to have been fundamental. In a similar way the careful studies
which have been made of the thousands of inscriptions found in the
West[7], dedicatory inscriptions, guild records, and epitaphs show us
that the language of the common people in the provinces did not differ
materially from that spoken in Italy. It was the language of the Roman
soldier, colonist, and trader, with common characteristics in the way of
diction, form, phraseology, and syntax, dropping into some slight local
peculiarities, but kept essentially a unit by the desire which each
community felt to imitate its officials and its upper classes.

The one part of the Roman world in which Latin did not gain an undisputed
pre-eminence was the Greek East. The Romans freely recognized the peculiar
position which Greek was destined to hold in that part of the Empire, and
styled it the _altera lingua_. Even in Greek lands, however, Latin gained
a strong hold, and exerted considerable influence on Greek[8].

In a very thoughtful paper on "Language-Rivalry and
Speech-Differentiation in the Case of Race-Mixture,"[9] Professor Hempl
has discussed the conditions under which language-rivalry takes place, and
states the results that follow. His conclusions have an interesting
bearing on the question which we are discussing here, how and why it was
that Latin supplanted the other languages with which it was brought into
contact.

He observes that when two languages are brought into conflict, there is
rarely a compromise or fusion, but one of the two is driven out of the
field altogether by the other. On analyzing the circumstances in which
such a struggle for supremacy between languages springs up, he finds four
characteristic cases. Sometimes the armies of one nation, though
comparatively small in numbers, conquer another country. They seize the
government of the conquered land; their ruler becomes its king, and they
become the aristocracy. They constitute a minority, however; they identify
their interests with those of the conquered people, and the language of
the subject people becomes the language of all classes. The second case
arises when a country is conquered by a foreign people who pour into it
with their wives and children through a long period and settle permanently
there. The speech of the natives in these circumstances disappears. In the
third case a more powerful people conquers a country, establishes a
dependent government in it, sends out merchants, colonists, and officials,
and establishes new towns. If such a province is held long enough, the
language of the conqueror prevails. In the fourth and last case peaceful
bands of immigrants enter a country to follow the humbler callings. They
are scattered among the natives, and succeed in proportion as they learn
the language of their adopted country. For their children and
grandchildren this language becomes their mother tongue, and the speech of
the invaded nation holds its ground.

The first typical case is illustrated by the history of Norman-French in
England, the second by that of the European colonists in America; the
Latinization of Spain, Gaul, and other Roman provinces furnishes an
instance of the third, and our own experience with European immigrants is
a case of the fourth characteristic situation. The third typical case of
language-conflict is the one with which we are concerned here, and the
analysis which we have made of the practices followed by the Romans in
occupying newly acquired territory, both in Italy and outside the
peninsula, shows us how closely they conform to the typical situation.
With the exception of Dacia, all the provinces were held by the Romans for
several centuries, so that their history under Roman rule satisfies the
condition of long occupation which Professor Hempl lays down as a
necessary one. Dacia which lay north of the Danube, and was thus far
removed from the centres of Roman influence, was erected into a province
in 107 A.D., and abandoned in 270. Notwithstanding its remoteness and the
comparatively short period during which it was occupied, the Latin
language has continued in use in that region to the present day. It
furnishes therefore a striking illustration of the effective methods which
the Romans used in Latinizing conquered territory.[10]

We have already had occasion to notice that a fusion between Latin and
the languages with which it was brought into contact, such a fusion, for
instance, as we find in Pidgin-English, did not occur. These languages
influenced Latin only by way of making additions to its vocabulary. A
great many Greek scientific and technical terms were adopted by the
learned during the period of Roman supremacy. Of this one is clearly
aware, for instance, in reading the philosophical and rhetorical works of
Cicero. A few words, like rufus, crept into the language from the Italic
dialects. Now and then the Keltic or Iberian names of Gallic or Spanish
articles were taken up, but the inflectional system and the syntax of
Latin retained their integrity. In the post-Roman period additions to the
vocabulary are more significant. It is said that about three hundred
Germanic words have found their way into all the Romance languages.[11]
The language of the province of Gaul was most affected since some four
hundred and fifty Gothic, Lombardic, and Burgundian words are found in
French alone, such words as boulevard, homard, and blesser. Each of the
provinces of course, when the Empire broke up, was subjected to
influences peculiar to itself. The residence of the Moors in Spain, for
seven hundred years, for instance, has left a deep impress on the Spanish
vocabulary, while the geographic position of Roumanian has exposed it to
the influence of Slavic, Albanian, Greek, Magyar, and Turkish.[12] A
sketch of the history of Latin after the breaking up of the Empire carries
us beyond the limits of the question which we set ourselves at the
beginning and out of the domain of the Latinist, but it may not be out of
place to gather together here a few of the facts which the Romance
philologist has contributed to its later history, because the life of
Latin has been continuous from the foundation of the city of Rome to the
present day.

In this later period the question of paramount interest is, why did Latin
in one part of the world develop into French, in another part into
Italian, in another into Spanish? One answer to this question has been
based on chronological grounds.[13] The Roman soldiers and traders who
went out to garrison and to settle in a newly acquired territory,
introduced that form of Latin which was in use in Italy at the time of
their departure from the peninsula. The form of speech thus planted there
developed along lines peculiar to itself, became the dialect of that
province, and ultimately the (Romance) language spoken in that part of
Europe. Sardinia was conquered in 241 B.C., and Sardinian therefore is a
development of the Latin spoken in Italy in the middle of the third
century B.C., that is of the Latin of Livius Andronicus. Spain was brought
under Roman rule in 197 B.C., and consequently Spanish is a natural
outgrowth of popular Latin of the time of Plautus. In a similar way, by
noticing the date at which the several provinces were established down to
the acquisition of Dacia in 107 A.D., we shall understand how it was that
the several Romance languages developed out of Latin. So long as the
Empire held together the unifying influence of official Latin, and the
constant intercommunication between the provinces, preserved the essential
unity of Latin throughout the world, but when the bonds were broken, the
naturally divergent tendencies which had existed from the beginning, but
had been held in check, made themselves felt, and the speech of the
several sections of the Old World developed into the languages which we
find in them to-day.

This theory is suggestive, and leads to several important results, but it
is open to serious criticism, and does not furnish a sufficient
explanation. It does not seem to take into account the steady stream of
emigrants from Italy to the provinces, and the constant transfer of troops
from one part of the world to another of which we become aware when we
study the history of any single province or legion. Spain was acquired, it
is true, in 197 B.C., and the Latin which was first introduced into it was
the Latin of Plautus, but the subjugation of the country occupied more
than sixty years, and during this period fresh troops were steadily poured
into the peninsula, and later on there was frequently an interchange of
legions between Spain and the other provinces. Furthermore, new
communities of Roman citizens were established there even down into the
Empire, and traders were steadily moving into the province. In this way it
would seem that the Latin of the early second century which was originally
carried into Spain must have been constantly undergoing modification,
and, so far as this influence goes, made approximately like the Latin
spoken elsewhere in the Empire.

A more satisfactory explanation seems to be that first clearly propounded
by the Italian philologist, Ascoli. His reasoning is that when we acquire
a foreign language we find it very difficult, and often impossible, to
master some of the new sounds. Our ears do not catch them exactly, or we
unconsciously substitute for the foreign sound some sound from our own
language. Our vocal organs, too, do not adapt themselves readily to the
reproduction of the strange sounds in another tongue, as we know from the
difficulty which we have in pronouncing the French nasal or the German
guttural. Similarly English differs somewhat as it is spoken by a
Frenchman, a German, and an Italian. The Frenchman has a tendency to
import the nasal into it, and he is also inclined to pronounce it like his
own language, while the German favors the guttural. In a paper on the
teaching of modern languages in our schools, Professor Grandgent says:[14]
"Usually there is no attempt made to teach any French sounds but _u_ and
the four nasal vowels; all the rest are unquestioningly replaced by the
English vowels and consonants that most nearly resemble them." The
substitution of sounds from one's own language in speaking a foreign
tongue, and the changes in voice-inflection, are more numerous and more
marked if the man who learns the new language is uneducated and acquires
it in casual intercourse from an uneducated man who speaks carelessly.

This was the state of things in the Roman provinces of southern Europe
when the Goths, Lombards, and other peoples from the North gradually
crossed the frontier and settled in the territory of Latin-speaking
peoples. In the sixth century, for instance, the Lombards in Italy, the
Franks in France, and the Visigoths in Spain would each give to the Latin
which they spoke a twist peculiar to themselves, and out of the one Latin
came Italian, out of the second, the language of France, and out of the
third, Spanish. This initial impulse toward the development of Latin along
different lines in Italy, France, and Spain was, of course, reinforced by
differences in climate, in the temperaments of the three peoples, in
their modes of life, and in their political and social experiences. These
centrifugal forces, so to speak, became effective because the political
and social bonds which had held Italy, France, and Spain together were now
loosened, and consequently communication between the provinces was less
frequent, and the standardizing influence of the official Latin of Rome
ceased to keep Latin a uniform thing throughout the Empire.

One naturally asks why Latin survived at all, why the languages of the
victorious Germanic peoples gave way to it. In reply to this question it
is commonly said that the fittest survived, that the superiority of Roman
civilization and of the Latin language gave Latin the victory. So far as
this factor is to be taken into account, I should prefer to say that it
was not so much the superiority of Latin, although that may be freely
recognized, as it was the sentimental respect which the Germans and their
leaders had for the Empire and for all its institutions. This is shown
clearly enough, for instance, in the pride which the Visigothic and
Frankish kings showed in holding their commissions from Rome, long after
Rome had lost the power to enforce its claims upon them; it is shown in
their use of Latin as the language of the court and of the official world.
Under the influence of this sentiment Germanic rulers and their peoples
imitated the Romans, and, among other things, took over their language.
The church probably exerted considerable influence in this direction. Many
of the Germans had been converted to Christianity before they entered the
Empire, and had heard Latin used in the church services and in the hymns.
Among cultivated people of different countries, it was the only medium of
communication, and was accepted as the lingua franca of the political and
ecclesiastical world, and the traditional medium of expression for
literary and legal purposes.

Perhaps, however, one element in the situation should be given more weight
than any of the facts just mentioned. Many of the barbarians had been
allowed to settle in a more or less peaceful fashion in Roman territory,
so that a large part of the western world came into their possession by
way of gradual occupation rather than by conquest.[15] They became peasant
proprietors, manual laborers, and soldiers in the Roman army. Perhaps,
therefore, their occupation of central and southern Europe bears some
resemblance to the peaceful invasion of this country by immigrants from
Europe, and they may have adopted Latin just as the German or Scandinavian
adopts English.

This brings us to the last important point in our inquiry. What is the
date before which we shall call the language of the Western Empire Latin,
and after which it is better to speak of French, Spanish, and Italian?
Such a line of division cannot be sharply drawn, and will in a measure be
artificial, because, as we shall attempt to show in the chapter which
follows on the "Latin of the Common People," Latin survives in the Romance
languages, and has had a continuous life up to the present day. But on
practical grounds it is convenient to have such a line of demarcation in
mind, and two attempts have been made to fix it. One attempt has been
based on linguistic grounds, the other follows political changes more
closely. Up to 700 A.D. certain common sound-changes take place in all
parts of the western world.[16] After that date, roughly speaking, this is
not the case. Consequently at that time we may say that unity ceased. The
other method of approaching the subject leads to essentially the same
conclusion, and shows us why unity ceased to exist.[17] In the sixth
century the Eastern Emperor Justinian conceived the idea of reuniting the
Roman world, and actually recovered and held for a short time Italy,
southern Spain, and Africa. This attempt on his part aroused a national
spirit among the peoples of these lands, and developed in them a sense of
their national independence and individuality. They threw off the foreign
yoke and became separate peoples, and developed, each of them, a language
of its own. Naturally this sentiment became effective at somewhat
different periods in different countries. For France the point may be
fixed in the sixth century, for Spain and Italy, in the seventh, and at
these dates Latin may be said to take the form of French, Spanish, and
Italian.




The Latin of the Common People



Unless one is a professional philologist he feels little interest in the
language of the common people. Its peculiarities in pronunciation, syntax,
phraseology, and the use of words we are inclined to avoid in our own
speech, because they mark a lack of cultivation. We test them by the
standards of polite society, and ignore them, or condemn them, or laugh at
them as abnormal or illogical or indicative of ignorance. So far as
literature goes, the speech of the common people has little interest for
us because it is not the recognized literary medium. These two reasons
have prevented the average man of cultivated tastes from giving much
attention to the way in which the masses speak, and only the professional
student has occupied himself with their language. This is unfortunate
because the speech of the common people has many points of interest, and,
instead of being illogical, is usually much more rigid in its adherence
to its own accepted principles than formal speech is, which is likely to
be influenced by convention or conventional associations. To take an
illustration of what I have in mind, the ending _-s_ is the common mark in
English of a plural form. For instance, "caps," "maps," "lines," and
"places" are plurals, and the corresponding singular forms are "cap,"
"map," "line," and "place." Consequently, granted the underlying premise,
it is a perfectly logical and eminently scientific process from the forms
"relapse" (pronounced, of course, "relaps") and "species" to postulate a
corresponding singular, and speak of "a relap" and "a specie," as a negro
of my acquaintance regularly does. "Scrope" and "lept," as preterites of
"scrape" and "leap," are correctly formed on the analogy of "broke" and
"crept," but are not used in polite society.

So far as English, German, or French go, a certain degree of general
interest has been stimulated lately in the form which they take in
every-day life by two very different agencies, by the popular articles of
students of language, and by realistic and dialect novels. But for our
knowledge of the Latin of the common people we lack these two
all-important sources of information. It occurred to only two Roman
writers, Petronius and Apuleius, to amuse their countrymen by writing
realistic stories, or stories with realistic features, and the Roman
grammarian felt an even greater contempt for popular Latin or a greater
indifference to it than we feel to-day. This feeling was shared, as we
know, by the great humanists of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
when the revival of interest in the Greek and Latin languages and
literatures begins. Petrarch, Poggio Bracciolini, and the other great
leaders in the movement were concerned with the literary aspects of the
classics, and the scholars of succeeding generations, so far as they
studied the language, confined their attention to that of the great Latin
stylists. The first student to conceive of the existence of popular Latin
as a form of speech which differed from formal literary Latin, seems to
have been the French scholar, Henri Étienne. In a little pamphlet on the
language and style of Plautus, written toward the end of the sixteenth
century, he noted the likeness between French and the language of the
Latin dramatist, without, however, clearly perceiving that the reason for
this similarity lay in the fact that the comedies of Plautus reflect the
spoken language of his time, and that French and the other Romance
languages have developed out of this, rather than from literary Latin. Not
until the middle of the eighteenth century was this truth clearly
recognized, and then almost simultaneously on both sides of the Rhine.

It was left for the nineteenth century, however, to furnish scientific
proof of the correctness of this hypothesis, and it was a fitting thing
that the existence of an unbroken line of connection between popular Latin
of the third century before our era, and the Romance languages of the
nineteenth century, should have been established at the same time by a
Latinist engaged in the study of Plautus, and a Romance philologist
working upward toward Latin. The Latin scholar was Ritschl, who showed
that the deviations from the formal standard which one finds in Plautus
are not anomalies or mistakes, but specimens of colloquial Latin which can
be traced down into the later period. The Romance philologist was Diez,
who found that certain forms and words, especially those from the
vocabulary of every-day life, which are common to many of the Romance
languages, are not to be found in serious Latin literature at all, but
occur only in those compositions, like comedy, satire, or the realistic
romance, which reflect the speech of the every-day man. This discovery
made it clear that the Romance languages are related to folk Latin, not to
literary Latin. It is sixty years since the study of vulgar Latin was put
on a scientific basis by the investigations of these two men, and during
that period the Latinist and the Romance philologist have joined hands in
extending our knowledge of it. From the Latin side a great impetus was
given to the work by the foundation in 1884 of Wölfflin's _Archiv für
lateinische Lexikographie und Grammatik_. This periodical, as is well
known, was intended to prepare the way for the publication of the Latin
_Thesaurus_, which the five German Academies are now bringing out.

One of its primary purposes, as its title indicates, was to investigate
the history of Latin words, and in its first number the editor called
attention to the importance of knowing the pieces of literature in which
each Latin word or locution occurred. The results have been very
illuminating. Some words or constructions or phrases are to be found, for
instance, only in comedy, satire, and the romance. They are evidently
peculiar to vulgar Latin. Others are freely used in these types of
literature, but sparingly employed in historical or rhetorical works. Here
again a shade of difference is noticeable between formal and familiar
usage. The method of the Latinist then is essentially one of comparison
and contrast. When, for instance, he finds the word _equus_ regularly used
by serious writers for "horse," but _caballus_ employed in that sense in
the colloquial compositions of Lucilius, Horace, and Petronius, he comes
to the conclusion that _caballus_ belongs to the vocabulary of every-day
life, that it is our "nag."

The line of reasoning which the Romance philologist follows in his study
of vulgar Latin is equally convincing. The existence of a large number of
words and idioms in French, Spanish, Italian, and the other Romance
languages can be explained only in one of three ways. All these different
languages may have hit on the same word or phrase to express an idea, or
these words and idioms may have been borrowed from one language by the
others, or they may come from a common origin. The first hypothesis is
unthinkable. The second is almost as impossible. Undoubtedly French, for
instance, borrowed some words from Spanish, and Spanish from Portuguese.
It would be conceivable that a few words originating in Spain should pass
into France, and thence into Italy, but it is quite beyond belief that the
large element which the languages from Spain to Roumania have in common
should have passed by borrowing over such a wide territory. It is clear
that this common element is inherited from Latin, out of which all the
Romance languages are derived. Out of the words, endings, idioms, and
constructions which French, Spanish, Italian, and the other tongues of
southern Europe have in common, it would be possible, within certain
limits, to reconstruct the parent speech, but fortunately we are not
limited to this material alone. At this point the Latinist and the Romance
philologist join hands. To take up again the illustration already used,
the student of the Romance languages finds the word for "horse" in Italian
is cavallo, in Spanish caballo, in French cheval, in Roumanian cal, and
so on. Evidently all these forms have come from caballus, which the
Latinist finds belongs to the vocabulary of vulgar, not of formal, Latin.
This one illustration out of many not only discloses the fact that the
Romance languages are to be connected with colloquial rather than with
literary Latin, but it also shows how the line of investigation opened by
Diez, and that followed by Wölfflin and his school, supplement each other.
By the use of the methods which these two scholars introduced, a large
amount of material bearing on the subject under discussion has been
collected and classified, and the characteristic features of the Latin of
the common people have been determined. It has been found that five or six
different and independent kinds of evidence may be used in reconstructing
this form of speech.

We naturally think first of the direct statements made by Latin writers.
These are to be found in the writings of Cicero, Quintilian, Seneca the
Rhetorician, Petronius, Aulus Gellius, Vitruvius, and the Latin
grammarians. The professional teacher Quintilian is shocked at the
illiterate speech of the spectators in the theatres and circus. Similarly
a character in Petronius utters a warning against the words such people
use. Cicero openly delights in using every-day Latin in his familiar
letters, while the architect Vitruvius expresses the anxious fear that he
may not be following the accepted rules of grammar. As we have noticed
above, a great deal of material showing the differences between formal and
colloquial Latin which these writers have in mind, may be obtained by
comparing, for instance, the Letters of Cicero with his rhetorical works,
or Seneca's satirical skit on the Emperor Claudius with his philosophical
writings. Now and then, too, a serious writer has occasion to use a bit of
popular Latin, but he conveniently labels it for us with an apologetic
phrase. Thus even St. Jerome, in his commentary on the Epistle to the
Ephesians, says: "Don't look a gift horse in the mouth, as the vulgar
proverb has it." To the ancient grammarians the "mistakes" and vulgarisms
of popular speech were abhorrent, and they have fortunately branded lists
of words and expressions which are not to be used by cultivated people.
The evidence which may be had from the Romance languages, supplemented by
Latin, not only contributes to our knowledge of the vocabulary of vulgar
Latin, but it also shows us many common idioms and constructions which
that form of speech had. Thus, "I will sing" in Italian is canterò
(=cantar[e]-ho), in Spanish, cantaré (=cantar-he), in French, chanterai
(=chanter-ai), and similar forms occur in some of the other Romance
languages. These forms are evidently made up of the Latin infinitive
cantare, depending on habeo ("I have to sing"). But the future in literary
Latin was cantabo, formed by adding an ending, as we know, and with that
the Romance future can have no connection. However, as a writer in the
_Archiv_ has pointed out,[18] just such analytical tense forms as are used
in the Romance languages to-day are to be found in the popular Latin
sermons of St. Jerome. From these idioms, common to Italian, French, and
Spanish, then, we can reconstruct a Latin formation current among the
common people. Finally a knowledge of the tendencies and practices of
spoken English helps us to identify similar usages when we come upon them
in our reading of Latin. When, for instance, the slave in a play of
Plautus says: "Do you catch on" (tenes?), "I'll touch the old man for a
loan" (tangam senem, etc.), or "I put it over him" (ei os sublevi) we
recognize specimens of Latin slang, because all of the metaphors involved
are in current use to-day. When one of the freedmen in Petronius remarks:
"You ought not to do a good turn to nobody" (neminem nihil boni facere
oportet) we see the same use of the double negative to which we are
accustomed in illiterate English. The rapid survey which we have just made
of the evidence bearing on the subject establishes beyond doubt the
existence of a form of speech among the Romans which cannot be identified
with literary Latin, but it has been held by some writers that the
material for the study of it is scanty. However, an impartial examination
of the facts ought not to lead one to this conclusion. On the Latin side
the material includes the comedies of Plautus and Terence, and the comic
fragments, the familiar odes of Catullus, the satires of Lucilius, Horace,
and Seneca, and here and there of Persius and Juvenal, the familiar
letters of Cicero, the romance of Petronius and that of Apuleius in part,
the Vulgate and some of the Christian fathers, the Journey to Jerusalem of
St. Ætheria, the glossaries, some technical books like Vitruvius and the
veterinary treatise of Chiron, and the private inscriptions, notably
epitaphs, the wall inscriptions of Pompeii, and the leaden tablets found
buried in the ground on which illiterate people wrote curses upon their
enemies.

It is clear that there has been preserved for the study of colloquial
Latin a very large body of material, coming from a great variety of
sources and running in point of time from Plautus in the third century
B.C. to St. Ætheria in the latter part of the fourth century or later. It
includes books by trained writers, like Horace and Petronius, who
consciously adopt the Latin of every-day life, and productions by
uneducated people, like St. Ætheria and the writers of epitaphs, who have
unwittingly used it.

St. Jerome says somewhere of spoken Latin that "it changes constantly as
you pass from one district to another, and from one period to another" (et
ipsa Latinitas et regionibus cotidie mutatur et tempore). If he had added
that it varies with circumstances also, he would have included the three
factors which have most to do in influencing the development of any
spoken language. We are made aware of the changes which time has brought
about in colloquial English when we compare the conversations in Fielding
with those in a present-day novel. When a spoken language is judged by the
standard of the corresponding literary medium, in some of its aspects it
proves to be conservative, in others progressive. It shows its
conservative tendency by retaining many words and phrases which have
passed out of literary use. The English of the Biglow Papers, when
compared with the literary speech of the time, abundantly illustrates this
fact. This conservative tendency is especially noticeable in districts
remote from literary centres, and those of us who are familiar with the
vernacular in Vermont or Maine will recall in it many quaint words and
expressions which literature abandoned long ago. In Virginia locutions may
be heard which have scarcely been current in literature since
Shakespeare's time. Now, literary and colloquial Latin were probably drawn
farther apart than the two corresponding forms of speech in English,
because Latin writers tried to make the literary tongue as much like Greek
in its form as possible, so that literary Latin would naturally have
diverged more rapidly and more widely from conversational Latin than
formal English has drawn away from colloquial English.

But a spoken language in its development is progressive as well as
conservative. To certain modifying influences it is especially sensitive.
It is fond of the concrete, picturesque, and novel, and has a high
appreciation of humor. These tendencies lead it to invent many new words
and expressions which must wait months, years, perhaps a generation,
before they are accepted in literature. Sometimes they are never accepted.
The history of such words as buncombe, dude, Mugwump, gerrymander, and
joy-ride illustrate for English the fact that words of a certain kind meet
a more hospitable reception in the spoken language than they do in
literature. The writer of comedy or farce, the humorist, and the man in
the street do not feel the constraint which the canons of good usage put
on the serious writer. They coin new words or use old words in a new way
or use new constructions without much hesitation. The extraordinary
material progress of the modern world during the last century has
undoubtedly stimulated this tendency in a remarkable way, but it would
seem as if the Latin of the common people from the time of Plautus to that
of Cicero must have been subjected to still more innovating influences
than modern conversational English has. During this period the newly
conquered territories in Spain, northern Africa, Greece, and Asia poured
their slaves and traders into Italy, and added a great many words to the
vocabulary of every-day life. The large admixture of Greek words and
idioms in the language of Petronius in the first century of our era
furnishes proof of this fact. A still greater influence must have been
felt within the language itself by the stimulus to the imagination which
the coming of these foreigners brought, with their new ideas, and their
new ways of looking at things, their strange costumes, manners, and
religions.

The second important factor which affects the spoken language is a
difference in culture and training. The speech of the gentleman differs
from that of the rustic. The conversational language of Terence, for
instance, is on a higher plane than that of Plautus, while the characters
in Plautus use better Latin than the freedmen in Petronius. The
illiterate freedmen in Petronius speak very differently from the freemen
in his story. Sometimes a particular occupation materially affects the
speech of those who pursue it. All of us know something of the linguistic
eccentricities of the London cabman, the Parisian thief, or the American
hobo. This particular influence cannot be estimated so well for Latin
because we lack sufficient material, but some progress has been made in
detecting the peculiarities of Latin of the nursery, the camp, and the
sea.

Of course a spoken language is never uniform throughout a given area.
Dialectal differences are sure to develop. A man from Indiana and another
from Maine will be sure to notice each other's peculiarities. Even the
railway, the newspaper, and the public school will never entirely
obliterate the old differences or prevent new ones from springing up.
Without these agencies which do so much to promote uniformity to-day,
Italy and the rest of the Empire must have shown greater dialectal
differences than we observe in American English or in British English
even.

For the sake of bringing out clearly some of the points of difference
between vulgar and formal Latin we have used certain illustrations, like
_caballus_, where the two forms of speech were radically opposed to each
other, but of course they did not constitute two different languages, and
that which they had in common was far greater than the element peculiar to
each, or, to put it in another way, they in large measure overlapped each
other. Perhaps we are in a position now to characterize colloquial Latin
and to define it as the language which was used in conversation throughout
the Empire with the innumerable variations which time and place gave it,
which in its most highly refined form, as spoken in literary circles at
Rome in the classical period, approached indefinitely near its ideal,
literary Latin, which in its most unconventional phase was the rude speech
of the rabble, or the "sermo inconditus" of the ancients. The facts which
have just been mentioned may be illustrated by the accompanying diagrams.

[Illustration: Fig. I]

[Illustration: Fig. II]

[Illustration: Fig. III]

[Illustration: Fig. IV]

In Fig. I the heavy-lined ellipse represents the formal diction of Cicero,
the dotted line ellipse his conversational vocabulary. They overlap each
other through a great part of their extent, but there are certain
literary locutions which would rarely be used by him in conversation, and
certain colloquial words and phrases which he would not use in formal
writing. Therefore the two ellipses would not be coterminous. In Fig. II
the heavy ellipse has the same meaning as in Fig. I, while the space
enclosed by the dotted line represents the vocabulary of an uneducated
Roman, which would be much smaller than that of Cicero and would show a
greater degree of difference from the literary vocabulary than Cicero's
conversational stock of words does. The relation of the uncultivated
Roman's conversational vocabulary to that of Cicero is illustrated in Fig.
III, while Fig. IV shows how the Latin of the average man in Rome would
compare, for instance, with that of a resident of Lugudunum, in Gaul.

This naturally brings us to consider the historical relations of literary
and colloquial Latin. In explaining them it has often been assumed that
colloquial Latin is a degenerate form of literary Latin, or that the
latter is a refined type of the former. Both these theories are equally
false. Neither is derived from the other. The true state of the case has
never been better put than by Schuchardt, who says: "Vulgar Latin stands
with reference to formal Latin in no derivative relation, in no paternal
relation, but they stand side by side. It is true that vulgar Latin came
from a Latin with fuller and freer forms, but it did not come from formal
Latin. It is true that formal Latin came from a Latin of a more popular
and a cruder character, but it did not come from vulgar Latin. In the
original speech of the people, preliterary Latin (the prisca Latinitas),
is to be found the origin of both; they were twin brothers."

Of this preliterary Latin we have no record. The best we can do is to
infer what its characteristics were from the earliest fragments of the
language which have come down to us, from the laws of the Twelve Tables,
for instance, from the religious and legal formulæ preserved to us by
Varro, Cicero, Livy, and others, from proverbs and popular sayings. It
would take us too far afield to analyze these documents here, but it may
be observed that we notice in them, among other characteristics, an
indifference to strict grammatical structure, not that subordination of
clauses to a main clause which comes only from an appreciation of the
logical relation of ideas to one another, but a co-ordination of clauses,
the heaping up of synonymous words, a tendency to use the analytical
rather than the synthetical form of expression, and a lack of fixity in
the forms of words and in inflectional endings. To illustrate some of
these traits in a single example, an early law reads "if [he] shall have
committed a theft by night, if [he] shall have killed him, let him be
regarded as put to death legally" (si nox furtum faxsit, si im occisit,
iure caesus esto).[19] We pass without warning from one subject, the
thief, in the first clause to another, the householder, in the second, and
back to the thief again in the third. Cato in his book on Agriculture
writes of the cattle: "let them feed; it will be better" (pascantur;
satius erit), instead of saying: "it will be better for them to feed" (or
"that they feed"). In an early law one reads: "on the tablet, on the white
surface" (in tabula, in albo), instead of "on the white tablet" (in alba
tabula). Perhaps we may sum up the general characteristics of this
preliterary Latin out of which both the spoken and written language
developed by saying that it showed a tendency to analysis rather than
synthesis, a loose and variable grammatical structure, and a lack of logic
in expression.

Livius Andronicus, Nævius, and Plautus in the third century before our era
show the language as first used for literary purposes, and with them the
breach between the spoken and written tongues begins. So far as Livius
Andronicus, the Father of Latin literature, is concerned, allowance should
be made without doubt for his lack of poetic inspiration and skill, and
for the fact that his principal work was a translation, but even making
this allowance the crude character of his Latin is apparent, and it is
very clear that literary Latin underwent a complete transformation
between his time and that of Horace and Virgil. Now, the significant
thing in this connection is the fact that this transformation was largely
brought about under an external influence, which affected the Latin of the
common people only indirectly and in small measure. Perhaps the
circumstances in which literary Latin was placed have never been repeated
in history. At the very outset it was brought under the sway of a highly
developed literary tongue, and all the writers who subsequently used it
earnestly strove to model it after Greek. Livius Andronicus, Ennius,
Accius, and Pacuvius were all of Greek origin and familiar with Greek.
They, as well as Plautus and Terence, translated and adapted Greek epics,
tragedies, and comedies. Several of the early writers, like Accius and
Lucilius, interested themselves in grammatical subjects, and did their
best to introduce system and regularity into their literary medium. Now,
Greek was a highly inflected, synthetical, regular, and logical medium of
literary expression, and it was inevitable that these qualities should be
introduced into Latin. But this influence affected the spoken language
very little, as we have already noticed. Its effect upon the speech of
the common people would be slight, because of the absence of the common
school which does so much to-day to hold together the spoken and written
languages.

The development then of preliterary Latin under the influence of this
systematizing, synthetical influence gave rise to literary Latin, while
its independent growth more nearly in accordance with its original genius
produced colloquial Latin. Consequently, we are not surprised to find that
the people's speech retained in a larger measure than literary Latin did
those qualities which we noticed in preliterary Latin. Those
characteristics are, in fact, to be expected in conversation. When a man
sets down his thoughts on paper he expresses himself with care and with a
certain reserve in his statements, and he usually has in mind exactly what
he wants to say. But in speaking he is not under this constraint. He is
likely to express himself in a tautological, careless, or even illogical
fashion. He rarely thinks out to the end what he has in mind, but loosely
adds clauses or sentences, as new ideas occur to him.

We have just been thinking mainly about the relation of words to one
another in a sentence. In the treatment of individual words, written and
spoken Latin developed along different lines. In English we make little
distinction between the quantity of vowels, but in Latin of course a given
vowel was either long or short, and literary tradition became so fixed in
this matter that the professional poets of the Augustan age do not
tolerate any deviation from it. There are indications, however, that the
common people did not observe the rules of quantity in their integrity. We
can readily understand why that may have been the case. The comparative
carelessness, which is characteristic of conversation, affects our
pronunciation of words. When there is a stress accent, as there was in
Latin, this is especially liable to be the case. We know in English how
much the unaccented syllables suffer in a long word like "laboratory." In
Latin the long unaccented vowels and the final syllable, which was never
protected by the accent, were peculiarly likely to lose their full value.
As a result, in conversational Latin certain final consonants tended to
drop away, and probably the long vowel following a short one was regularly
shortened when the accent fell on the short syllable, or on the syllable
which followed the long one. Some scholars go so far as to maintain that
in course of time all distinction in quantity in the unaccented vowels was
lost in popular Latin. Sometimes the influence of the accent led to the
excision of the vowel in the syllable which followed it. Probus, a
grammarian of the fourth century of our era, in what we might call a
"Guide to Good Usage"[20] or "One Hundred Words Mispronounced," warns his
readers against masclus and anglus for masculus and angulus. This is the
same popular tendency which we see illustrated in "lab'ratory."

The quality of vowels as well as their quantity changed. The obscuring of
certain vowel sounds in ordinary or careless conversation in this country
in such words as "Latun" and "Amurican" is a phenomenon which is familiar
enough. In fact a large number of our vowel sounds seem to have
degenerated into a grunt. Latin was affected in a somewhat similar way,
although not to the same extent as present-day English. Both the ancient
grammarians in their warnings and the Romance languages bear evidence to
this effect.

We noticed above that the final consonant was exposed to danger by the
fact that the syllable containing it was never protected by the accent. It
is also true that there was a tendency to do away with any difficult
combination of consonants. We recall in English the current
pronunciations, "February," and "Calwell" for Caldwell. The average Roman
in the same way was inclined to follow the line of least resistance.
Sometimes, as in the two English examples just given, he avoided a
difficult combination of consonants by dropping one of them. This method
he followed in saying santus for sanctus, and scriserunt for scripserunt,
just as in vulgar English one now and then hears "slep" and "kep" for the
more difficult "slept" and "kept." Sometimes he lightened the
pronunciation by metathesis, as he did when he pronounced interpretor as
interpertor. A third device was to insert a vowel, as illiterate
English-speaking people do in the pronunciations "ellum" and "Henery." In
this way, for instance, the Roman avoided the difficult combinations -mn-
and -chn- by saying mina and techina for the historically correct mna and
techna. Another method of surmounting the difficulty was to assimilate one
of the two consonants to the other. This is a favorite practice of the
shop-girl, over which the newspapers make merry in their phonetical
reproductions of supposed conversations heard from behind the counter.
Adopting the same easy way of speaking, the uneducated Roman sometimes
said isse for ipse, and scritus for scriptus. To pass to another point of
difference, the laws determining the incidence of the accent were very
firmly established in literary Latin. The accent must fall on the penult,
if it was long, otherwise on the antepenult of the word. But in popular
Latin there were certain classes of words in whose case these principles
were not observed.

The very nature of the accent probably differed in the two forms of
speech. In preliterary Latin the stress was undoubtedly a marked feature
of the accent, and this continued to be the case in the popular speech
throughout the entire history of the language, but, as I have tried to
prove in another paper,[21] in formal Latin the stress became very slight,
and the pitch grew to be the characteristic feature of the accent.
Consequently, when Virgil read a passage of the _Æneid_ to Augustus and
Livia the effect on the ear of the comparatively unstressed language, with
the rhythmical rise and fall of the pitch, would have been very different
from that made by the conversation of the average man, with the accented
syllables more clearly marked by a stress.

In this brief chapter we cannot attempt to go into details, and in
speaking of the morphology of vulgar Latin we must content ourselves with
sketching its general characteristics and tendencies, as we have done in
the case of its phonology. In English our inflectional forms have been
reduced to a minimum, and consequently there is little scope for
differences in this respect between the written and spoken languages. From
the analogy of other forms the illiterate man occasionally says: "I swum,"
or, "I clumb," or "he don't," but there is little chance of making a
mistake. However, with three genders, five declensions for nouns, a fixed
method of comparison for adjectives and adverbs, an elaborate system of
pronouns, with active and deponent, regular and irregular verbs, four
conjugations, and a complex synthetical method of forming the moods and
tenses, the pitfalls for the unwary Roman were without number, as the
present-day student of Latin can testify to his sorrow. That the man in
the street, who had no newspaper to standardize his Latin, and little
chance to learn it in school, did not make more mistakes is surprising. In
a way many of the errors which he did make were historically not errors at
all. This fact will readily appear from an illustration or two. In our
survey of preliterary Latin we had occasion to notice that one of its
characteristics was a lack of fixity in the use of forms or constructions.
In the third century before our era, a Roman could say audibo or audiam,
contemplor or contemplo, senatus consultum or senati consultum. Thanks to
the efforts of the scientific grammarian, and to the systematizing
influence which Greek exerted upon literary Latin, most verbs were made
deponent or active once for all, a given noun was permanently assigned to
a particular declension, a verb to one conjugation, and the slight
tendency which the language had to the analytical method of forming the
moods and tenses was summarily checked. Of course the common people tried
to imitate their betters in all these matters, but the old variable usages
persisted to some extent, and the average man failed to grasp the
niceties of the new grammar at many points. His failures were especially
noticeable where the accepted literary form did not seem to follow the
principles of analogy. When these principles are involved, the common
people are sticklers for consistency. The educated man conjugates: "I
don't," "you don't," "he doesn't," "we don't," "they don't"; but the
anomalous form "he doesn't" has to give way in the speech of the average
man to "he don't." To take only one illustration in Latin of the effect of
the same influence, the present infinitive active of almost all verbs ends
in -re, e.g., amare, monere, and regere. Consequently the irregular
infinitive of the verb "to be able," posse, could not stand its ground,
and ultimately became potere in vulgar Latin. In one respect in the
inflectional forms of the verb, the purist was unexpectedly successful. In
comedy of the third and second centuries B.C., we find sporadic evidence
of a tendency to use auxiliary verbs in forming certain tenses, as we do
in English when we say: "I will go," "I have gone," or "I had gone." This
movement was thoroughly stamped out for the time, and does not reappear
until comparatively late.

In Latin there are three genders, and the grammatical gender of a noun is
not necessarily identical with its natural gender. For inanimate objects
it is often determined simply by the form of the noun. Sella, seat, of the
first declension, is feminine, because almost all nouns ending in -a are
feminine; hortus, garden, is masculine, because nouns in -us of its
declension are mostly masculine, and so on. From such a system as this two
results are reasonably sure to follow. Where the gender of a noun in
literary Latin did not conform to these rules, in popular Latin it would
be brought into harmony with others of its class. Thus stigma, one of the
few neuter nouns in -a, and consequently assigned to the third declension,
was brought in popular speech into line with sella and the long list of
similar words in -a, was made feminine, and put in the first declension.
In the case of another class of words, analogy was supplemented by a
mechanical influence. We have noticed already that the tendency of the
stressed syllable in a word to absorb effort and attention led to the
obscuration of certain final consonants, because the final syllable was
never protected by the accent. Thus hortus in some parts of the Empire
became hortu in ordinary pronunciation, and the neuter caelum, heaven,
became caelu. The consequent identity in the ending led to a confusion in
the gender, and to the ultimate treatment of the word for "heaven" as a
masculine. These influences and others caused many changes in the gender
of nouns in popular speech, and in course of time brought about the
elimination of the neuter gender from the neo-Latin languages.

Something has been said already of the vocabulary of the common people. It
was naturally much smaller than that of cultivated people. Its poverty
made their style monotonous when they had occasion to express themselves
in writing, as one can see in reading St. Ætheria's account of her journey
to the Holy Land, and of course this impression of monotony is heightened
by such a writer's inability to vary the form of expression. Even within
its small range it differs from the vocabulary of formal Latin in three or
four important respects. It has no occasion, or little occasion, to use
certain words which a formal writer employs, or it uses substitutes for
them. So testa was used in part for caput, and bucca for os. On the other
hand, it employs certain words and phrases, for instance vulgar words and
expletives, which are not admitted into literature.

In its choice of words it shows a marked preference for certain suffixes
and prefixes. It would furnish an interesting excursion into folk
psychology to speculate on the reasons for this preference in one case and
another. Sometimes it is possible to make out the influence at work. In
reading a piece of popular Latin one is very likely to be impressed with
the large number of diminutives which are used, sometimes in the strict
sense of the primitive word. The frequency of this usage reminds one in
turn of the fact that not infrequently in the Romance languages the
corresponding words are diminutive forms in their origin, so that
evidently the diminutive in these cases crowded out the primitive word in
popular use, and has continued to our own day. The reason why the
diminutive ending was favored does not seem far to seek. That suffix
properly indicates that the object in question is smaller than the average
of its kind. Smallness in a child stimulates our affection, in a dwarf,
pity or aversion. Now we give expression to our emotion more readily in
the intercourse of every-day life than we do in writing, and the emotions
of the masses are perhaps nearer the surface and more readily stirred than
are those of the classes, and many things excite them which would leave
unruffled the feelings of those who are more conventional. The stirring of
these emotions finds expression in the use of the diminutive ending, which
indirectly, as we have seen, suggests sympathy, affection, pity, or
contempt. The ending -osus for adjectives was favored because of its
sonorous character. Certain prefixes, like de-, dis-, and ex-, were freely
used with verbs, because they strengthened the meaning of the verb, and
popular speech is inclined to emphasize its ideas unduly.

To speak further of derivation, in the matter of compounds and
crystallized word groups there are usually differences between a spoken
and written language. The written language is apt to establish certain
canons which the people do not observe. For instance, we avoid hybrid
compounds of Greek and Latin elements in the serious writing of English.
In formal Latin we notice the same objection to Greco-Latin words, and yet
in Plautus, and in other colloquial writers, such compounds are freely
used for comic effect. In a somewhat similar category belong the
combinations of two adverbs or prepositions, which one finds in the later
popular Latin, some of which have survived in the Romance languages. A
case in point is ab ante, which has come down to us in the Italian avanti
and the French avant. Such word-groups are of course debarred from formal
speech.

In examining the vocabulary of colloquial Latin, we have noticed its
comparative poverty, its need of certain words which are not required in
formal Latin, its preference for certain prefixes and suffixes, and its
willingness to violate certain rules, in forming compounds and
word-groups, which the written language scrupulously observes. It remains
for us to consider a third, and perhaps the most important, element of
difference between the vocabularies of the two forms of speech. I mean the
use of a word in vulgar Latin with another meaning from that which it has
in formal Latin. We are familiar enough with the different senses which a
word often has in conversational and in literary English. "Funny," for
instance, means "amusing" in formal English, but it is often the synonym
of "strange" in conversation. The sense of a word may be extended, or be
restricted, or there may be a transfer of meaning. In the colloquial use
of "funny" we have an extension of its literary sense. The same is true of
"splendid," "jolly," "lovely," and "awfully," and of such Latin words as
"lepidus," "probe," and "pulchre." When we speak of "a splendid sun," we
are using splendid in its proper sense of shining or bright, but when we
say, "a splendid fellow," the adjective is used as a general epithet
expressing admiration. On the other hand, when a man of a certain class
refers to his "woman," he is employing the word in the restricted sense of
"wife." Perhaps we should put in a third category that very large
colloquial use of words in a transferred or figurative sense, which is
illustrated by "to touch" or "to strike" when applied to success in
getting money from a person. Our current slang is characterized by the
free use of words in this figurative way.

Under the head of syntax we must content ourselves with speaking of only
two changes, but these were far-reaching. We have already noticed the
analytical tendency of preliterary Latin. This tendency was held in check,
as we have just observed, so far as verb forms were concerned, but in the
comparison of adjectives and in the use of the cases it steadily made
headway, and ultimately triumphed over the synthetical principle. The
method adopted by literary Latin of indicating the comparative and the
superlative degrees of an adjective, by adding the endings -ior and
-issimus respectively, succumbed in the end to the practice of prefixing
plus or magis and maxime to the positive form. To take another
illustration of the same characteristic of popular Latin, as early as the
time of Plautus, we see a tendency to adopt our modern method of
indicating the relation which a substantive bears to some other word in
the sentence by means of a preposition rather than by simply using a case
form. The careless Roman was inclined to say, for instance, magna pars de
exercitu, rather than to use the genitive case of the word for army, magna
pars exercitus. Perhaps it seemed to him to bring out the relation a
little more clearly or forcibly.

The use of a preposition to show the relation became almost a necessity
when certain final consonants became silent, because with their
disappearance, and the reduction of the vowels to a uniform quantity, it
was often difficult to distinguish between the cases. Since final -m was
lost in pronunciation, _Asia_ might be nominative, accusative, or
ablative. If you wished to say that something happened in Asia, it would
not suffice to use the simple ablative, because that form would have the
same pronunciation as the nominative or the accusative, Asia(m), but the
preposition must be prefixed, _in Asia_. Another factor cooperated with
those which have already been mentioned in bringing about the confusion of
the cases. Certain prepositions were used with the accusative to indicate
one relation, and with the ablative to suggest another. _In Asia_, for
instance, meant "in Asia," _in Asiam_, "into Asia." When the two case
forms became identical in pronunciation, the meaning of the phrase would
be determined by the verb in the sentence, so that with a verb of going
the preposition would mean "into," while with a verb of rest it would mean
"in." In other words the idea of motion or rest is disassociated from the
case forms. From the analogy of _in_ it was very easy to pass to other
prepositions like _per_, which in literary Latin took the accusative only,
and to use these prepositions also with cases which, historically
speaking, were ablatives.

In his heart of hearts the school-boy regards the periodic sentences which
Cicero hurled at Catiline, and which Livy used in telling the story of
Rome as unnatural and perverse. All the specious arguments which his
teacher urges upon him, to prove that the periodic form of expression was
just as natural to the Roman as the direct method is to us, fail to
convince him that he is not right in his feeling--and he _is_ right. Of
course in English, as a rule, the subject must precede the verb, the
object must follow it, and the adverb and attribute adjective must stand
before the words to which they belong. In the sentence: "Octavianus wished
Cicero to be saved," not a single change may be made in the order without
changing the sense, but in a language like Latin, where relations are
largely expressed by inflectional forms, almost any order is possible, so
that a writer may vary his arrangement and grouping of words to suit the
thought which he wishes to convey. But this is a different matter from
the construction of a period with its main subject at the beginning, its
main verb at the end, and all sorts of subordinate and modifying clauses
locked in by these two words. This was not the way in which the Romans
talked with one another. We can see that plainly enough from the
conversations in Plautus and Terence. In fact the Latin period is an
artificial product, brought to perfection by many generations of literary
workers, and the nearer we get to the Latin of the common people the more
natural the order and style seem to the English-speaking person. The
speech of the uneducated freedmen in the romance of Petronius is
interesting in this connection. They not only fail to use the period, but
they rarely subordinate one idea to another. Instead of saying "I saw him
when he was an ædile," they are likely to say "I saw him; he was an ædile
then."

When we were analyzing preliterary Latin, we noticed that the
co-ordination of ideas was one of its characteristics, so that this trait
evidently persisted in popular speech, while literary Latin became more
logical and complex.

In the preceding pages we have tried to find out the main features of
popular Latin. In doing so we have constantly thought of literary Latin
as the foil or standard of comparison. Now, strangely enough, no sooner
had the literary medium of expression slowly and painfully disassociated
itself from the language of the common people than influences which it
could not resist brought it down again to the level of its humbler
brother. Its integrity depended of course upon the acceptance of certain
recognized standards. But when flourishing schools of literature sprang up
in Spain, in Africa, and in Gaul, the paramount authority of Rome and the
common standard for the Latin world which she had set were lost. When some
men tried to imitate Cicero and Quintilian, and others, Seneca, there
ceased to be a common model of excellence. Similarly a careful distinction
between the diction of prose and verse was gradually obliterated. There
was a loss of interest in literature, and professional writers gave less
attention to their diction and style. The appearance of Christianity, too,
exercised a profound influence on literary Latin. Christian writers and
preachers made their appeal to the common people rather than to the
literary world. They, therefore, expressed themselves in language which
would be readily understood by the average man, as St. Jerome frankly
tells us his purpose was. The result of these influences, and of others,
acting on literary Latin, was to destroy its unity and its carefully
developed scientific system, and to bring it nearer and nearer in its
genius to popular Latin, or, to put it in another way, the literary medium
comes to show many of the characteristics of the spoken language. Gregory
of Tours, writing in the sixth century, laments the fact that he is
unfamiliar with grammatical principles, and with this century literary
Latin may be said to disappear.

As for popular Latin, it has never ceased to exist. It is the language of
France, Spain, Italy, Roumania, and all the Romance countries to-day. Its
history has been unbroken from the founding of Rome to the present time.
Various scholars have tried to determine the date before which we shall
call the popular speech vulgar Latin, and after which it may better be
styled French or Spanish or Italian, as the case may be. Some would fix
the dividing line in the early part of the eighth century A.D., when
phonetic changes common to all parts of the Roman world would cease to
occur. Others would fix it at different periods between the middle of the
sixth to the middle of the seventh century, according as each section of
the old Roman world passed definitely under the control of its Germanic
invaders. The historical relations of literary and colloquial Latin would
be roughly indicated by the accompanying diagram, in which preliterary
Latin divides, on the appearance of literature in the third century B.C.,
into popular Latin and literary Latin. These two forms of speech develop
along independent lines until, in the sixth century, literary Latin is
merged in popular Latin and disappears. The unity for the Latin tongue
thus secured was short lived, because within a century the differentiation
begins which gives rise to the present-day Romance languages.

It may interest some of the readers of this chapter to look over a few
specimens of vulgar Latin from the various periods of its history.

(a) The first one is an extract from the Laws of the Twelve Tables. The
original document goes back to the middle of the fifth century B.C., and
shows us some of the characteristics of preliterary Latin. The
non-periodic form, the omission of pronouns, and the change of subject
without warning are especially noticeable.

"Si in ius vocat, ito. Ni it, antestamino, igitur em (=eum) capito. Si
calvitur pedemve struit, manum endo iacito (=inicito). Si morbus aevitasve
(=aetasve) vitium escit, iumentum dato: si nolet, arceram ne sternito."

[Illustration:

1 Preliterary Latin.
2 Vulgar Latin
3 Literary Latin
4-8 The Romance languages.

]

(b) This passage from one of Cicero's letters to his brother (_ad Q.
fr._ 2, 3, 2) may illustrate the familiar conversational style of a
gentleman in the first century B.C. It describes an harangue made by the
politician Clodius to his partisans.

"Ille furens et exsanguis interrogabat suos in clamore ipso quis esset qui
plebem fame necaret. Respondebant operae: 'Pompeius.' Quem ire vellent.
Respondebant: 'Crassum.' Is aderat tum Miloni animo non amico. Hora fere
nona quasi signo dato Clodiani nostros consputare coeperunt. Exarsit
dolor. Vrgere illi ut loco nos moverent."

(c) In the following passage, Petronius, 57, one of the freedmen at
Trimalchio's dinner flames out in anger at a fellow-guest whose bearing
seems to him supercilious. It shows a great many of the characteristics of
vulgar Latin which have been mentioned in this paper. The similarity of
its style to that of the preliterary specimen is worth observing. The
great number of proverbs and bits of popular wisdom are also noticeable.

"Et nunc spero me sic vivere, ut nemini iocus sim. Homo inter homines sum,
capite aperto ambulo; assem aerarium nemini debeo; constitutum habui
nunquam; nemo mihi in foro dixit 'redde, quod debes.' Glebulas emi,
lamelullas paravi; viginti ventres pasco et canem; contubernalem meam
redemi, ne quis in sinu illius manus tergeret; mille denarios pro capite
solvi; sevir gratis factus sum; spero, sic moriar, ut mortuus non
erubescam."

(d) This short inscription from Pompeii shows some of the peculiarities
of popular pronunciation. In ortu we see the same difficulty in knowing
when to sound the aspirate which the cockney Englishman has. The silence
of the final -m, and the reduction of ae to e are also interesting. Presta
mi sinceru (=sincerum): si te amet que (=quae) custodit ortu (=hortum)
Venus.

(e) Here follow some of the vulgar forms against which a grammarian,
probably of the fourth century, warns his readers. We notice that the
popular "mistakes" to which he calls attention are in (1) syncopation and
assimilation, in (2) the use of the diminutive for the primitive, and
pronouncing au as o, in (3) the same reduction of ct to t (or tt) which we
find in such Romance forms as Ottobre, in (4) the aspirate falsely added,
in (5) syncopation and the confusion of v and b, and in (6) the silence of
final -m.

  (1) frigida non fricda
  (2) auris non oricla
  (3) auctoritas non autoritas
  (4) ostiae non hostiae
  (5) vapulo non baplo
  (6) passim non passi

(f) The following passages are taken from Brunot's "Histoire de la
langue Fraçaise," p. 144. In the third column the opening sentence of the
famous Oath of Strasburg of 842 A.D. is given. In the other columns the
form which it would have taken at different periods is set down. These
passages bring out clearly the unbroken line of descent from Latin to
modern French.




    The Oath of Strasburg of 842


    Classic Latin

    Per Dei amorem et
    per christiani
    populi et nostram
    communem
    salutem,
    ab hac die, quantum
    Deus scire
    et posse mini
    dat, servabo
    hunc meum fratrem
    Carolum


    Spoken Latin, Seventh Cent.

    For deo amore et
    por chrestyano
    pob(o)lo et nostro
    comune salvamento
    de esto
    die en avante
    en quanto Deos
    sabere et podere
    me donat, sic
    salvarayo eo
    eccesto meon
    fradre Karlo


    Actual Text

    Pro deo amur et
    pro christian
    poblo et nostro
    commun salvament,
    d'ist di
    en avant, in
    quant Deus
    savir et podir
    me dunat, si
    salvarai eo cist
    meon fradre
    Karlo


    French, Eleventh Cent.

    Por dieu amor et
    por del crestüen
    poeple et nostre
    comun salvement,
    de cest
    jorn en avant,
    quant que Dieus
    saveir et podeir
    me donet, si
    salverai jo cest
    mien fredre
    Charlon


    French, Fifteenth Cent.

    Pour l'amour
    Dieu et pour le
    sauvement du
    chrestien peuple
    et le nostre commun,
    de cest
    jour en avant,
    quant que Dieu
    savoir et pouvoir
    me done,
    si sauverai je
    cest mien frere
    Charle


    Modern French

    Pour l'amour de
    Dieu et pour le
    salut commun
    du peuple chrétien
    et le nôtre,
    à partir de ce
    jour, autant
    que Dieu m'en
    donne le savoir
    et le pouvoir,
    je soutiendrai
    mon frère Charles




The Poetry of the Common People of Rome



I. Their Metrical Epitaphs


The old village churchyard on a summer afternoon is a favorite spot with
many of us. The absence of movement, contrasted with the life just outside
its walls, the drowsy humming of the bees in the flowers which grow at
will, the restful gray of the stones and the green of the moss give one a
feeling of peace and quiet, while the ancient dates and quaint lettering
in the inscriptions carry us far from the hurry and bustle and trivial
interests of present-day life. No sense of sadness touches us. The stories
which the stones tell are so far removed from us in point of time that
even those who grieved at the loss of the departed have long since
followed their friends, and when we read the bits of life history on the
crumbling monuments, we feel only that pleasurable emotion which, as
Cicero says in one of his letters, comes from our reading in history of
the little tragedies of men of the past. But the epitaph deals with the
common people, whom history is apt to forget, and gives us a glimpse of
their character, their doings, their beliefs, and their views of life and
death. They furnish us a simple and direct record of the life and the
aspirations of the average man, the record of a life not interpreted for
us by the biographer, historian, or novelist, but set down in all its
simplicity by one of the common people themselves.

These facts lend to the ancient Roman epitaphs their peculiar interest and
charm. They give us a glimpse into the every-day life of the people which
a Cicero, or a Virgil, or even a Horace cannot offer us. They must have
exerted an influence, too, on Roman character, which we with our changed
conditions can scarcely appreciate. We shall understand this fact if we
call to mind the differences between the ancient practices in the matter
of burial and our own. The village churchyard is with us a thing of the
past. Whether on sanitary grounds, or for the sake of quiet and seclusion,
in the interest of economy, or not to obtrude the thought of death upon
us, the modern cemetery is put outside of our towns, and the memorials in
it are rarely read by any of us. Our fathers did otherwise. The churchyard
of old England and of New England was in the middle of the village, and
"short cuts" from one part of the village to another led through its
enclosure. Perhaps it was this fact which tempted our ancestors to set
forth their life histories more fully than we do, who know that few, if
any, will come to read them. Or is the world getting more reserved and
sophisticated? Are we coming to put a greater restraint upon the
expression of our emotions? Do we hesitate more than our fathers did to
talk about ourselves? The ancient Romans were like our fathers in their
willingness or desire to tell us of themselves. Perhaps the differences in
their burial practices, which were mentioned above, tempted them to be
communicative, and sometimes even garrulous. They put their tombstones in
a spot still more frequented than the churchyard. They placed them by the
side of the highways, just outside the city walls, where people were
coming or going constantly. Along the Street of Tombs, as one goes out of
Pompeii, or along the great Appian Way, which runs from Rome to Capua,
Southern Italy and Brundisium, the port of departure for Greece and the
Orient, they stand on both sides of the roadway and make their mute
appeals for our attention. We know their like in the enclosure about old
Trinity in New York, in the burial ground in New Haven, or in the
churchyards across the water. They tell us not merely the date of birth
and death of the deceased, but they let us know enough of his life to
invest it with a certain individuality, and to give it a flavor of its
own.

Some 40,000 of them have come down to us, and nearly 2,000 of the
inscriptions upon them are metrical. This particular group is of special
interest to us, because the use of verse seems to tempt the engraver to go
beyond a bare statement of facts and to philosophize a bit about the
present and the future. Those who lie beneath the stones still claim some
recognition from the living, for they often call upon the passer-by to
halt and read their epitaphs, and as the Roman walked along the Appian Way
two thousand years ago, or as we stroll along the same highway to-day, it
is in silent converse with the dead. Sometimes the stone itself addresses
us, as does that of Olus Granius:[22] "This mute stone begs thee to stop,
stranger, until it has disclosed its mission and told thee whose shade it
covers. Here lie the bones of a man, modest, honest, and trusty--the
crier, Olus Granius. That is all. It wanted thee not to be unaware of
this. Fare thee well." This craving for the attention of the passer-by
leads the composer of one epitaph to use somewhat the same device which
our advertisers employ in the street-cars when they say: "Do not look at
this spot," for he writes: "Turn not your eyes this way and wish not to
learn our fate," but two lines later, relenting, he adds: "Now stop,
traveller...within this narrow resting-place,"[23] and then we get the
whole story. Sometimes a dramatic, lifelike touch is given by putting the
inscription into the form of a dialogue between the dead and those who are
left behind. Upon a stone found near Rome runs the inscription:[24]
"Hail, name dear to us, Stephanus,...thy Moschis and thy Diodorus salute
thee." To which the dead man replies: "Hail chaste wife, hail Diodorus,
my friend, my brother." The dead man often begs for a pleasant word from
the passer-by. The Romans, for instance, who left Ostia by the highway,
read upon a stone the sentiment:[25] "May it go well with you who lie
within and, as for you who go your way and read these lines, 'the earth
rest lightly on thee' say." This pious salutation loses some of the flavor
of spontaneity in our eyes when we find that it had become so much of a
convention as to be indicated by the initial letters of the several words:
S(it) t(ibi) t(erra) l(evis). The traveller and the departed exchange good
wishes on a stone found near Velitræ:[26]

    "May it go well with you who read and you who pass this way,
    The like to mine and me who on this spot my tomb have built."

One class of passers-by was dreaded by the dweller beneath the stone--the
man with a paint-brush who was looking for a conspicuous spot on which to
paint the name of his favorite political candidate. To such an one the
hope is expressed "that his ambition may be realized, provided he
instructs his slave not to paint this stone."[27]

These wayside epitaphs must have left an impress on the mind and character
of the Roman which we can scarcely appreciate. The peasant read them as he
trudged homeward on market days, the gentleman, as he drove to his villa
on the countryside, and the traveller who came from the South, the East,
or the North. In them the history of his country was set forth in the
achievements of her great men, her prætors and consuls, her generals who
had conquered and her governors who had ruled Gaul, Spain, Africa, and
Asia. In them the public services, and the deeds of charity of the rich
and powerful were recorded and the homely virtues and self-sacrifices of
the humbler man and woman found expression there. Check by jowl with the
tomb of some great leader upon whom the people or the emperor had showered
all the titles and honors in their power might stand the stone of the poor
physician, Dionysius,[28] of whom it is said "to all the sick who came to
him he gave his services free of charge; he set forth in his deeds what he
taught in his precepts."

But perhaps more of the inscriptions in verse, and with them we are here
concerned, are in praise of women than of men. They make clear to us the
place which women held in Roman life, the state of society, and the
feminine qualities which were held in most esteem. The world which they
portray is quite another from that of Ovid and Juvenal. The common people
still hold to the old standards of morality and duty. The degeneracy of
smart society has made little progress here. The marriage tie is held
sacred; the wife and husband, the parent and child are held close to each
other in bonds of affection. The virtues of women are those which
Martinianus records on the stone of his wife Sofroniola:[29]

"Purity, loyalty, affection, a sense of duty, a yielding nature, and
whatever qualities God has implanted in women."


   (Castitas fides earitas pietas obsequium Et quaecumque deus faemenis
   inesse praecepit.)

Upon a stone near Turin,[30] Valerius wrote in memory of his wife the
simple line:

"Pure in heart, modest, of seemly bearing, discreet, noble-minded, and
held in high esteem."


   (Casta pudica decens sapiens Generosa probata.)

Only one discordant note is struck in this chorus of praise. This fierce
invective stands upon an altar at Rome:[31] "Here for all time has been
set down in writing the shameful record of the freedwoman Acte, of
poisoned mind, and treacherous, cunning, and hard-hearted. Oh! for a nail,
and a hempen rope to choke her, and flaming pitch to burn up her wicked
heart."

A double tribute is paid to a certain Statilia in this naïve
inscription:[32] "Thou who wert beautiful beyond measure and true to thy
husbands, didst twice enter the bonds of wedlock...and he who came first,
had he been able to withstand the fates, would have set up this stone to
thee, while I, alas! who have been blessed by thy pure heart and love for
thee for sixteen years, lo! now I have lost thee." Still greater sticklers
for the truth at the expense of convention are two fond husbands who
borrowed a pretty couplet composed in memory of some woman "of tender
age," and then substituted upon the monuments of their wives the more
truthful phrase "of middle age,"[33] and another man warns women, from the
fate of his wife, to shun the excessive use of jewels.[34]

It was only natural that when men came to the end of life they should ask
themselves its meaning, should speculate upon the state after death, and
should turn their thoughts to the powers which controlled their destiny.
We have been accustomed to form our conceptions of the religion of the
Romans from what their philosophers and moralists and poets have written
about it. But a great chasm lies between the teachings of these men and
the beliefs of the common people. Only from a study of the epitaphs do we
know what the average Roman thought and felt on this subject. A few years
ago Professor Harkness, in an admirable article on "The Scepticism and
Fatalism of the Common People of Rome," showed that "the common people
placed no faith in the gods who occupy so prominent a place in Roman
literature, and that their nearest approach to belief in a divinity was
their recognition of fate," which "seldom appears as a fixed law of
nature...but rather as a blind necessity, depending on chance and not on
law." The gods are mentioned by name in the poetic epitaphs only, and for
poetic purposes, and even here only one in fifty of the metrical
inscriptions contains a direct reference to any supernatural power. For
none of these deities, save for Mother Earth, does the writer of an
epitaph show any affection. This feeling one may see in the couplet which
reads:[35] "Mother Earth, to thee have we committed the bones of
Fortunata, to thee who dost come near to thy children as a mother," and
Professor Harkness thoughtfully remarks in this connection that "the love
of nature and appreciation of its beauties, which form a distinguishing
characteristic of Roman literature in contrast to all the other
literatures of antiquity, are the outgrowth of this feeling of kinship
which the Italians entertained for mother earth."

It is a little surprising, to us on first thought, that the Roman did not
interpose some concrete personalities between himself and this vague
conception of fate, some personal agencies, at least, to carry out the
decrees of destiny. But it will not seem so strange after all when we
recall the fact that the deities of the early Italians were without form
or substance. The anthropomorphic teachings of Greek literature, art, and
religion found an echo in the Jupiter and Juno, the Hercules and Pan of
Virgil and Horace, but made no impress on the faith of the common people,
who, with that regard for tradition which characterized the Romans,
followed the fathers in their way of thinking.

A disbelief in personal gods hardly accords with faith in a life after
death, but most of the Romans believed in an existence of some sort in the
world beyond. A Dutch scholar has lately established this fact beyond
reasonable doubt, by a careful study of the epitaphs in verse.[36] One
tombstone reads:[37]


   "Into nothing from nothing how quickly we go,"

and another:[38]


   "Once we were not, now we are as we were,"

and the sentiment, "I was not, I was, I am not, I care not" (non fui, fui,
non sum, non euro) was so freely used that it is indicated now and then
merely by the initial letters N.f.f.n.s.n.c., but compared with the great
number of inscriptions in which belief in a life after death finds
expression such utterances are few. But how and where that life was to be
passed the Romans were in doubt. We have noticed above how little the
common people accepted the belief of the poets in Jupiter and Pluto and
the other gods, or rather how little their theology had been influenced by
Greek art and literature. In their conception of the place of abode after
death, it is otherwise. Many of them believe with Virgil that it lies
below the earth. As one of them says in his epitaph:[39]

    "No sorrow to the world below I bring."

Or with other poets the departed are thought of as dwelling in the Elysian
fields or the Isles of the Blessed. As one stone cries out to the
passer-by:[40] "May you live who shall have said. 'She lives in Elysium,'"
and of a little girl it is said:[41] "May thy shade flower in fields
Elysian." Sometimes the soul goes to the sky or the stars: "Here lies the
body of the bard Laberius, for his spirit has gone to the place from
which it came;"[42] "The tomb holds my limbs, my soul shall pass to the
stars of heaven."[43] But more frequently the departed dwell in the tomb.
As one of them expresses it: "This is my eternal home; here have I been
placed; here shall I be for aye." This belief that the shade hovers about
the tomb accounts for the salutations addressed to it which we have
noticed above, and for the food and flowers which are brought to satisfy
its appetites and tastes. These tributes to the dead do not seem to accord
with the current Roman belief that the body was dissolved to dust, and
that the soul was clothed with some incorporeal form, but the Romans were
no more consistent in their eschatology than many of us are.

Perhaps it was this vague conception of the state after death which
deprived the Roman of that exultant joy in anticipation of the world
beyond which the devout Christian, a hundred years or more ago, expressed
in his epitaphs, with the Golden City so clearly pictured to his eye, and
by way of compensation the Roman was saved from the dread of death, for
no judgment-seat confronted him in the other world. The end of life was
awaited with reasonable composure. Sometimes death was welcomed because it
brought rest. As a citizen of Lambsesis expresses it:[44] "Here is my home
forever; here is a rest from toil;" and upon a woman's stone we read:[45]

    "Whither hast thou gone, dear soul, seeking rest from troubles,
    For what else than trouble hast thou had throughout thy life?"

But this pessimistic view of life rarely appears on the monuments. Not
infrequently the departed expresses a certain satisfaction with his life's
record, as does a citizen of Beneventum, who remarks:[46] "No man have I
wronged, to many have I rendered services," or he tells us of the pleasure
which he has found in the good things of life, and advises us to enjoy
them. A Spanish epitaph reads:[47] "Eat, drink, enjoy thyself, follow me"
(es bibe lude veni). In a lighter or more garrulous vein another says:[48]
"Come, friends, let us enjoy the happy time of life; let us dine merrily,
while short life lasts, mellow with wine, in jocund intercourse. All
these about us did the same while they were living. They gave, received,
and enjoyed good things while they lived. And let us imitate the practices
of the fathers. Live while you live, and begrudge nothing to the dear soul
which Heaven has given you." This philosophy of life is expressed very
succinctly in: "What I have eaten and drunk I have with me; what I have
foregone I have lost,"[49] and still more concretely in:

    "Wine and amours and baths weaken our bodily health,
    Yet life is made up of wine and amours and baths."[50]

Under the statue of a man reclining and holding a cup in his hand, Flavius
Agricola writes:[51] "Tibur was my native place; I was called Agricola,
Flavius too.... I who lie here as you see me. And in the world above in
the years which the fates granted, I cherished my dear soul, nor did the
god of wine e'er fail me.... Ye friends who read this, I bid you mix your
wine, and before death comes, crown your temples with flowers, and
drink.... All the rest the earth and fire consume after death." Probably
we should be wrong in tracing to the teachings of Epicurus, even in their
vulgarized popular form, the theory that the value of life is to be
estimated by the material pleasure it has to offer. A man's theory of life
is largely a matter of temperament or constitution. He may find support
for it in the teachings of philosophy, but he is apt to choose a
philosophy which suits his way of thinking rather than to let his views of
life be determined by abstract philosophic teachings. The men whose
epitaphs we have just read would probably have been hedonists if Epicurus
had never lived. It is interesting to note in passing that holding this
conception of life naturally presupposes the acceptance of one of the
notions of death which we considered above--that it ends all.

In another connection, a year or two ago, I had occasion to speak of the
literary merit of some of these metrical epitaphs,[52] of their interest
for us as specimens of the literary compositions of the common people, and
of their value in indicating the æsthetic taste of the average Roman. It
may not be without interest here to speak of the literary form of some of
them a little more at length than was possible in that connection. Latin
has always been, and continues to be among modern peoples, a favored
language for epitaphs and dedications. The reasons why it holds its
favored position are not far to seek. It is vigorous and concise. Then
again in English and in most modern languages the order which words may
take in a given sentence is in most cases inexorably fixed by grammatical
necessity. It was not so with Latin. Its highly inflected character made
it possible, as we know, to arrange the words which convey an idea in
various orders, and these different groupings of the same words gave
different shades of meaning to the sentence, and different emotional
effects are secured by changing the sequence in which the minor
conceptions are presented. By putting contrasted words side by side, or at
corresponding points in the sentence, the impression is heightened. When a
composition takes the form of verse the possibilities in the way of
contrast are largely increased. The high degree of perfection to which
Horace brought the balancing and interlocking of ideas in some of his
Odes, illustrates the great advantage which the Latin poet had over the
English writer because of the flexibility of the medium of expression
which he used. This advantage was the Roman's birthright, and lends a
certain distinction even to the verses of the people, which we are
discussing here. Certain other stylistic qualities of these metrical
epitaphs, which are intended to produce somewhat the same effects, will
not seem to us so admirable. I mean alliteration, play upon words, the
acrostic arrangement, and epigrammatic effects. These literary tricks find
little place in our serious verse, and the finer Latin poets rarely
indulge in them. They seem to be especially out of place in an epitaph,
which should avoid studied effects and meretricious devices. But writers
in the early stages of a literature and common people of all periods find
a pleasure in them. Alliteration, onomatopœia, the pun, and the play on
words are to be found in all the early Latin poets, and they are
especially frequent with literary men like Plautus and Terence, Pacuvius
and Accius, who wrote for the stage, and therefore for the common people.
One or two illustrations of the use of these literary devices may be
sufficient. A little girl at Rome, who died when five years old, bore the
strange name of Mater, or Mother, and on her tombstone stands the
sentiment:[53] "Mater I was by name, mater I shall not be by law."
"Sepulcrum hau pulcrum pulcrai feminae" of the famous Claudia
inscription,[54] Professor Lane cleverly rendered "Site not sightly of a
sightly dame." Quite beyond my power of translating into English, so as to
reproduce its complicated play on words, is the appropriate epitaph of the
rhetorician, Romanius lovinus:[55]


   "Docta loqui doctus quique loqui docuit."

A great variety of verses is used in the epitaphs, but the dactylic
hexameter and the elegiac are the favorites. The stately character of the
hexameter makes it a suitable medium in which to express a serious
sentiment, while the sudden break in the second verse of the elegiac
couplet suggests the emotion of the writer. The verses are constructed
with considerable regard for technique. Now and then there is a false
quantity, an unpleasant sequence, or a heavy effect, but such blemishes
are comparatively infrequent. There is much that is trivial, commonplace,
and prosaic in these productions of the common people, but now and then
one comes upon a phrase, a verse, or a whole poem which shows strength or
grace or pathos. An orator of the late period, not without vigor, writes
upon his tombstone:[56] "I have lived blessed by the gods, by friends, by
letters."

    (Vixi beatus dis, amicis, literis.)

A rather pretty, though not unusual, sentiment occurs in an elegiac
couplet to a young girl,[57] in which the word amoena is the adjective,
meaning "pleasant to see," in the first, while in the second verse it is
the girl's name: "As a rose is amoena when it blooms in the early spring
time, so was I Amoena to those who saw me."

    (Ut rosa amoena homini est quom primo tempore floret.
    Quei me viderunt, seic Amoena fui.)

There is a touch of pathos in the inscription which a mother put on the
stone of her son:[58] "A sorrowing mother has set up this monument to a
son who has never caused her any sorrow, except that he is no more," and
in this tribute of a husband:[59] "Out of my slender means now that the
end has come, my wife, all that I could do, this gift, a small small one
for thy deserts, have I made." The epitaph of a little girl, named
Felicia, or Kitty, has this sentiment in graceful verse:[60] "Rest lightly
upon thee the earth, and over thy grave the fragrant balsam grow, and
roses sweet entwine thy buried bones." Upon the stone of a little girl who
bore the name of Xanthippe, and the nickname Iaia, is an inscription with
one of two pretty conceits and phrases. With it we may properly bring to
an end our brief survey of these verses of the common people of Rome. In a
somewhat free rendering it reads in part:[61] "Whether the thought of
death distress thee or of life, read to the end. Xanthippe by name, yclept
also Iaia by way of jest, escapes from sorrow since her soul from the body
flies. She rests here in the soft cradle of the earth,... comely,
charming, keen of mind, gay in discourse. If there be aught of compassion
in the gods above, bear her to the sun and light."




II. Their Dedicatory and Ephemeral Verses


In the last paper we took up for consideration some of the Roman metrical
epitaphs. These compositions, however, do not include all the productions
in verse of the common people of Rome. On temples, altars, bridges,
statues, and house walls, now and then, we find bits of verse. Most of the
extant dedicatory lines are in honor of Hercules, Silvanus, Priapus, and
the Cæsars. Whether the two famous inscriptions to Hercules by the sons of
Vertuleius and by Mummius belong here or not it is hard to say. At all
events, they were probably composed by amateurs, and have a peculiar
interest for us because they belong to the second century B.C., and
therefore stand near the beginning of Latin letters; they show us the
language before it had been perfected and adapted to literary purposes by
an Ennius, a Virgil, and a Horace, and they are written in the old native
Saturnian verse, into which Livius Andronicus, "the Father of Latin
literature," translated the Odyssey. Consequently they show us the
language before it had gained in polish and lost in vigor under the
influence of the Greeks. The second of these two little poems is a
finger-post, in fact, at the parting of the ways for Roman civilization.
It was upon a tablet let into the wall of the temple of Hercules, and
commemorates the triumphant return to Rome of Mummius, the conqueror of
Corinth. It points back to the good old days of Roman contempt for Greek
art, and ignorance of it, for Mummius, in his stupid indifference to the
beautiful monuments of Corinth, made himself the typical Philistine for
all time. It points forward to the new Greco-Roman civilization of Italy,
because the works of art which Mummius is said to have brought back with
him, and the Greeks who probably followed in his train, augmented that
stream of Greek influence which in the next century or two swept through
the peninsula.

In the same primitive metre as these dedications is the Song of the Arval
Brothers, which was found engraved on a stone in the grove of the goddess
Dea Dia, a few miles outside of Rome. This hymn the priests sang at the
May festival of the goddess, when the farmers brought them the first
fruits of the earth. It has no intrinsic literary merit, but it carries us
back beyond the great wars with Carthage for supremacy in the western
Mediterranean, beyond the contest with Pyrrhus for overlordship in
Southern Italy, beyond the struggle for life with the Samnites in Central
Italy, beyond even the founding of the city on the Tiber, to a people who
lived by tilling the soil and tending their flocks and herds.

But we have turned away from the dedicatory verses. On the bridges which
span our streams we sometimes record the names of the commissioners or the
engineers, or the bridge builders responsible for the structure. Perhaps
we are wise in thinking these prosaic inscriptions suitable for our ugly
iron bridges. Their more picturesque stone structures tempted the Romans
now and then to drop into verse, and to go beyond a bare statement of the
facts of construction. Over the Anio in Italy, on a bridge which Narses,
the great general of Justinian, restored, the Roman, as he passed, read in
graceful verse:[62] "We go on our way with the swift-moving waters of the
torrent beneath our feet, and we delight on hearing the roar of the angry
water. Go then joyfully at your ease, Quirites, and let the echoing
murmur of the stream sing ever of Narses. He who could subdue the
unyielding spirit of the Goths has taught the rivers to bear a stern
yoke."

It is an interesting thing to find that the prettiest of the dedicatory
poems are in honor of the forest-god Silvanus. One of these poems, Titus
Pomponius Victor, the agent of the Cæsars, left inscribed upon a
tablet[63] high up in the Grecian Alps. It reads: "Silvanus, half-enclosed
in the sacred ash-tree, guardian mighty art thou of this pleasaunce in the
heights. To thee we consecrate in verse these thanks, because across the
fields and Alpine tops, and through thy guests in sweetly smelling groves,
while justice I dispense and the concerns of Cæsar serve, with thy
protecting care thou guidest us. Bring me and mine to Rome once more, and
grant that we may till Italian fields with thee as guardian. In guerdon
therefor will I give a thousand mighty trees." It is a pretty picture.
This deputy of Cæsar has finished his long and perilous journeys through
the wilds of the North in the performance of his duties. His face is now
turned toward Italy, and his thoughts are fixed on Rome. In this "little
garden spot," as he calls it, in the mountains he pours out his gratitude
to the forest-god, who has carried him safely through dangers and brought
him thus far on his homeward way, and he vows a thousand trees to his
protector. It is too bad that we do not know how the vow was to be
paid--not by cutting down the trees, we feel sure. One line of Victor's
little poem is worth quoting in the original. He thanks Silvanus for
conducting him in safety "through the mountain heights, and through Tuique
luci suave olentis hospites." Who are the _hospites_? The wild beasts of
the forests, we suppose. Now _hospites_ may, of course, mean either
"guests" or "hosts," and it is a pretty conceit of Victor's to think of
the wolves and bears as the guests of the forest-god, as we have ventured
to render the phrase in the translation given above. Or, are they Victor's
hosts, whose characters have been so changed by Silvanus that Victor has
had friendly help rather than fierce attacks from them?

A very modern practice is revealed by a stone found near the famous temple
of Æsculapius, the god of healing, at Epidaurus in Argolis, upon which
two ears are shown in relief, and below them the Latin couplet:[64] "Long
ago Cutius Gallus had vowed these ears to thee, scion of Phœbus, and now
he has put them here, for thou hast healed his ears." It is an ancient
ex-voto, and calls to mind on the one hand the cult of Æsculapius, which
Walter Pater has so charmingly portrayed in Marius the Epicurean, and on
the other hand it shows us that the practice of setting up ex-votos, of
which one sees so many at shrines and in churches across the water to-day,
has been borrowed from the pagans. A pretty bit of sentiment is suggested
by an inscription[65] found near the ancient village of Ucetia in Southern
France: "This shrine to the Nymphs have I built, because many times and
oft have I used this spring when an old man as well as a youth."

All of the verses which we have been considering up to this point have
come down to us more or less carefully engraved upon stone, in honor of
some god, to record some achievement of importance, or in memory of a
departed friend. But besides these formal records of the past, we find a
great many hastily scratched or painted sentiments or notices, which have
a peculiar interest for us because they are the careless effusions or
unstudied productions of the moment, and give us the atmosphere of
antiquity as nothing else can do. The stuccoed walls of the houses, and
the sharp-pointed stylus which was used in writing on wax tablets offered
too strong a temptation for the lounger or passer-by to resist. To people
of this class, and to merchants advertising their wares, we owe the three
thousand or more graffiti found at Pompeii. The ephemeral inscriptions
which were intended for practical purposes, such as the election notices,
the announcements of gladiatorial contests, of houses to rent, of articles
lost and for sale, are in prose, but the lovelorn lounger inscribed his
sentiments frequently in verse, and these verses deserve a passing notice
here. One man of this class in his erotic ecstasy writes on the wall of a
Pompeian basilica:[66] "May I perish if I'd wish to be a god without
thee." That hope sprang eternal in the breast of the Pompeian lover is
illustrated by the last two lines of this tragic declaration:[67]

    "If you can and won't,
    Give me hope no more.
    Hope you foster and you ever
    Bid me come again to-morrow.
    Force me then to die
    Whom you force to live
    A life apart from you.
    Death will be a boon,
    Not to be tormented.
    Yet what hope has snatched away
    To the lover hope gives back."

This effusion has led another passer-by to write beneath it the Delphic
sentiment: "May the man who shall read this never read anything else." The
symptoms of the ailment in its most acute form are described by some Roman
lover in the verses which he has left us on the wall of Caligula's palace,
on the Palatine:[68]

    "No courage in my heart,
    No sleep to close my eyes,
    A tide of surging love
    Throughout the day and night."

This seems to come from one who looks upon the lover with a sympathetic
eye, but who is himself fancy free:

    "Whoever loves, good health to him,
    And perish he who knows not how,
    But doubly ruined may he be
    Who will not yield to love's appeal."[69]

The first verse of this little poem,

    "Quisquis amat valeat, pereat qui nescit amare,"

represented by the first couplet of the English rendering, calls to mind
the swinging refrain which we find a century or two later in the
_Pervigilium Veneris_, that last lyrical outburst of the pagan world,
written for the eve of the spring festival of Venus:

    "Cras amet qui nunquam amavit quique amavit eras amet."

    (To-morrow he shall love who ne'er has loved
    And who has loved, to-morrow he shall love.)

An interesting study might be made of the favorite types of feminine
beauty in the Roman poets. Horace sings of the "golden-haired" Pyrrhas,
and Phyllises, and Chloes, and seems to have had an admiration for
blondes, but a poet of the common people, who has recorded his opinion on
this subject in the atrium of a Pompeian house, shows a more catholic
taste, although his freedom of judgment is held in some constraint:

    "My fair girl has taught me to hate
    Brunettes with their tresses of black.
    I will hate if I can, but if not,
    'Gainst my will I must love them also."[70]

On the other hand, one Pompeian had such an inborn dread of brunettes
that, whenever he met one, he found it necessary to take an appropriate
antidote, or prophylactic:

    "Whoever loves a maiden dark
    By charcoal dark is he consumed.
    When maiden dark I light upon
    I eat the saving blackberry."[71]

These amateur poets do not rely entirely upon their own Muse, but borrow
from Ovid, Propertius, or Virgil, when they recall sentiments in those
writers which express their feelings. Sometimes it is a tag, or a line, or
a couplet which is taken, but the borrowings are woven into the context
with some skill. The poet above who is under compulsion from his blonde
sweetheart, has taken the second half of his production verbatim from
Ovid, and for the first half of it has modified a line of Propertius.
Other writers have set down their sentiments in verse on more prosaic
subjects. A traveller on his way to the capital has scribbled these lines
on the wall, perhaps of a wine-shop where he stopped for refreshment:[72]

    "Hither have we come in safety.
    Now I hasten on my way,
    That once more it may be mine
    To behold our Lares, Rome."

At one point in a Pompeian street, the eye of a straggler would catch this
notice in doggerel verse:[73]

    "Here's no place for loafers.
    Lounger, move along!"

On the wall of a wine-shop a barmaid has thus advertised her wares:[74]

    "Here for a cent is a drink,
    Two cents brings something still better.
    Four cents in all, if you pay,
    Wine of Falernum is yours."

It must have been a lineal descendant of one of the parasites of Plautus
who wrote:[75]

    "A barbarian he is to me
    At whose house I'm not asked to dine."

Here is a sentiment which sounds very modern:

    "The common opinion is this:
    That property should be divided."[76]

This touch of modernity reminds one of another group of verses which
brings antiquity into the closest possible touch with some present-day
practices. The Romans, like ourselves, were great travellers and
sightseers, and the marvels of Egypt in particular appealed to them, as
they do to us, with irresistible force. Above all, the great statue of
Memnon, which gave forth a strange sound when it was struck by the first
rays of the rising sun, drew travellers from far and near. Those of us who
know the Mammoth Cave, Niagara Falls, the Garden of the Gods, or some
other of our natural wonders, will recall how fond a certain class of
visitors are of immortalizing themselves by scratching their names or a
sentiment on the walls or the rocks which form these marvels. Such
inscriptions We find on the temple walls in Egypt--three of them appear
on the statue of Memnon, recording in verse the fact that the writers had
visited the statue and heard the voice of the god at sunrise. One of these
Egyptian travellers, a certain Roman lady journeying up the Nile, has
scratched these verses on a wall of the temple at Memphis:[77]

    "The pyramids without thee have I seen,
    My brother sweet, and yet, as tribute sad,
    The bitter tears have poured adown my cheek,
    And sadly mindful of thy absence now
    I chisel here this melancholy note."

Then follow the name and titles of the absent brother, who is better known
to posterity from these scribbled lines of a Cook's tourist than from any
official records which have come down to us. All of these pieces of
popular poetry which we have been discussing thus far were engraved on
stone, bronze, stucco, or on some other durable material. A very few bits
of this kind of verse, from one to a half dozen lines in length, have come
down to us in literature. They have the unique distinction, too, of being
specimens of Roman folk poetry, and some of them are found in the most
unlikely places. Two of them are preserved by a learned commentator on
the Epistles of Horace. They carry us back to our school-boy days. When we
read

    "The plague take him who's last to reach me,"[78]

we can see the Roman urchin standing in the market-place, chanting the
magic formula, and opposite him the row of youngsters on tiptoe, each one
waiting for the signal to run across the intervening space and be the
first to touch their comrade. What visions of early days come back to
us--days when we clasped hands in a circle and danced about one or two
children placed in the centre of the ring, and chanted in unison some
refrain, upon reading in the same commentator to Horace a ditty which
runs:[79]

    "King shall you be
    If you do well.
    If you do ill
    You shall not be."

The other bits of Roman folk poetry which we have are most of them
preserved by Suetonius, the gossipy biographer of the Cæsars. They recall
very different scenes. Cæsar has returned in triumph to Rome, bringing in
his train the trousered Gauls, to mingle on the street with the toga-clad
Romans. He has even had the audacity to enroll some of these strange
peoples in the Roman senate, that ancient body of dignity and convention,
and the people chant in the streets the ditty:[80]

    "Cæsar leads the Gauls in triumph,
    In the senate too he puts them.
    Now they've donned the broad-striped toga
    And have laid aside their breeches."

Such acts as these on Cæsar's part led some political versifier to write
on Cæsar's statue a couplet which contrasted his conduct with that of the
first great republican, Lucius Brutus:

    "Brutus drove the kings from Rome,
    And first consul thus became.
    This man drove the consuls out,
    And at last became the king."[81]

We may fancy that these verses played no small part in spurring on Marcus
Brutus to emulate his ancestor and join the conspiracy against the
tyrant. With one more bit of folk poetry, quoted by Suetonius, we may
bring our sketch to an end. Germanicus Cæsar, the flower of the imperial
family, the brilliant general and idol of the people, is suddenly stricken
with a mortal illness. The crowds throng the streets to hear the latest
news from the sick-chamber of their hero. Suddenly the rumor flies through
the streets that the crisis is past, that Germanicus will live, and the
crowds surge through the public squares chanting:

    "Saved now is Rome,
    Saved too the land,
    Saved our Germanicus."[82]





The Origin of the Realistic Romance among the Romans



One of the most fascinating and tantalizing problems of literary history
concerns the origin of prose fiction among the Romans. We can trace the
growth of the epic from its infancy in the third century before Christ as
it develops in strength in the poems of Nævius, Ennius, and Cicero until
it reaches its full stature in the _Æneid_, and then we can see the
decline of its vigor in the _Pharsalia_, the _Punica_, the _Thebais_, and
_Achilleis_, until it practically dies a natural death in the mythological
and historical poems of Claudian. The way also in which tragedy, comedy,
lyric poetry, history, biography, and the other types of literature in
prose and verse came into existence and developed among the Romans can be
followed with reasonable success. But the origin and early history of the
novel is involved in obscurity. The great realistic romance of Petronius
of the first century of our era is without a legally recognized ancestor
and has no direct descendant. The situation is the more surprising when we
recall its probable size in its original form. Of course only a part of it
has come down to us, some one hundred and ten pages in all. Its great size
probably proved fatal to its preservation in its complete form, or at
least contributed to that end, for it has been estimated that it ran from
six hundred to nine hundred pages, being longer, therefore, than the
average novel of Dickens and Scott. Consequently we are not dealing with a
bit of ephemeral literature, but with an elaborate composition of a high
degree of excellence, behind which we should expect to find a long line of
development. We are puzzled not so much by the utter absence of anything
in the way of prose fiction before the time of Petronius as by the
difficulty of establishing any satisfactory logical connection between
these pieces of literature and the romance of Petronius. We are
bewildered, in fact, by the various possibilities which the situation
presents. The work shows points of similarity with several antecedent
forms of composition, but the gaps which lie in any assumed line of
descent are so great as to make us question its correctness.

If we call to mind the present condition of this romance and those
characteristic features of it which are pertinent to the question at
issue, the nature of the problem and its difficulty also will be apparent
at once. Out of the original work, in a rather fragmentary form, only four
or five main episodes are extant, one of which is the brilliant story of
the Dinner of Trimalchio. The action takes place for the most part in
Southern Italy, and the principal characters are freedmen who have made
their fortunes and degenerate freemen who are picking up a precarious
living by their wits. The freemen, who are the central figures in the
novel, are involved in a great variety of experiences, most of them of a
disgraceful sort, and the story is a story of low life. Women play an
important rôle in the narrative, more important perhaps than they do in
any other kind of ancient literature--at least their individuality is more
marked. The efficient motif is erotic. I say the efficient, because the
conventional motif which seems to account for all the misadventures of the
anti-hero Encolpius is the wrath of an offended deity. A great part of
the book has an atmosphere of satire about it which piques our curiosity
and baffles us at the same time, because it is hard to say how much of
this element is inherent in the subject itself, and how much of it lies in
the intention of the author. It is the characteristic of parvenu society
to imitate smart society to the best of its ability, and its social
functions are a parody of the like events in the upper set. The story of a
dinner party, for instance, given by such a _nouveau riche_ as Trimalchio,
would constantly remind us by its likeness and its unlikeness, by its sins
of omission and commission, of a similar event in correct society. In
other words, it would be a parody on a proper dinner, even if the man who
described the event knew nothing about the usages of good society, and
with no ulterior motive in mind set down accurately the doings of his
upstart characters. For instance, when Trimalchio's chef has three white
pigs driven into the dining-room for the ostensible purpose of allowing
the guests to pick one out for the next course, with the memory of our own
monkey breakfasts and horseback dinners in mind, we may feel that this is
a not improbable attempt on the part of a Roman parvenu to imitate his
betters in giving a dinner somewhat out of the ordinary. Members of the
smart set at Rome try to impress their guests by the value and weight of
their silver plate. Why shouldn't the host of our story adopt the more
direct and effective way of accomplishing the same object by having the
weight of silver engraved on each article? He does so. It is a very
natural thing for him to do. In good society they talk of literature and
art. Why isn't it natural for Trimalchio to turn the conversation into the
same channels, even if he does make Hannibal take Troy and does confuse
the epic heroes and some late champions of the gladiatorial ring?

In other words, much of that which is satirical in Petronius is so only
because we are setting up in our minds a comparison between the doings of
his rich freedmen and the requirements of good taste and moderation. But
it seems possible to detect a satirical or a cynical purpose on the part
of the author carried farther than is involved in the choice of his
subject and the realistic presentation of his characters. Petronius seems
to delight in putting his most admirable sentiments in the mouths of
contemptible characters. Some of the best literary criticism we have of
the period, he presents through the medium of the parasite rhetorician
Agamemnon. That happy phrase characterizing Horace's style, "curiosa
felicitas," which has perhaps never been equalled in its brevity and
appositeness, is coined by the incorrigible poetaster Eumolpus. It is he
too who composes and recites the two rather brilliant epic poems
incorporated into the _Satirae_, one of which is received with a shower of
stones by the bystanders. The impassioned eulogy of the careers of
Democritus, Chrysippus, Lysippus, and Myron, who had endured hunger, pain,
and weariness of body and mind for the sake of science, art, and the good
of their fellow-men, and the diatribe against the pursuit of comfort and
pleasure which characterized the people of his own time, are put in the
mouth of the same _roué_ Eumolpus.

These situations have the true Horatian humor about them. The most serious
and systematic discourse which Horace has given us, in his Satires, on the
art of living, comes from the crack-brained Damasippus, who has made a
failure of his own life. In another of his poems, after having set forth
at great length the weaknesses of his fellow-mortals, Horace himself is
convicted of being inconsistent, a slave to his passions, and a victim of
hot temper by his own slave Davus. We are reminded again of the literary
method of Horace in his Satires when we read the dramatic description of
the shipwreck in Petronius. The blackness of night descends upon the
water; the little bark which contains the hero and his friends is at the
mercy of the sea; Lichas, the master of the vessel, is swept from the deck
by a wave, Encolpius and his comrade Giton prepare to die in each other's
embrace, but the tragic scene ends with a ridiculous picture of Eumolpus
bellowing out above the roar of the storm a new poem which he is setting
down upon a huge piece of parchment. Evidently Petronius has the same
dread of being taken too seriously which Horace shows so often in his
Satires. The cynical, or at least unmoral, attitude of Petronius is
brought out in a still more marked way at the close of this same passage.
Of those upon the ill-fated ship the degenerates Encolpius, Giton, and
Eumolpus, who have wronged Lichas irreparably, escape, while the pious
Lichas meets a horrible death. All this seems to make it clear that not
only does the subject which Petronius has treated inevitably involve a
satire upon contemporary society, but that the author takes a satirical or
cynical attitude toward life.

Another characteristic of the story is its realism. There are no
marvellous adventures, and in fact no improbable incidents in it. The
author never obtrudes his own personality upon us, as his successor
Apuleius sometimes does, or as Thackeray has done. We know what the people
in the story are like, not from the author's description of them, but from
their actions, from the subjects about which they talk, and from the way
in which they talk. Agamemnon converses as a rhetorician might talk,
Habinnas like a millionnaire stone-cutter, and Echion like a rag-dealer,
and their language and style are what we should expect from men of their
standing in society and of their occupations. The conversations of
Trimalchio and his freedmen guests are not witty, and their jests are not
clever. This adherence to the true principles of realism is the more
noteworthy in the case of so brilliant a writer as Petronius, and those of
us who recall some of the preternaturally clever conversations in the
pages of Henry James and other contemporary novelists may feel that in
this respect he is a truer artist than they are.

The novel of Petronius has one other characteristic which is significant,
if we attempt to trace the origin of this type of literature. It is cast
in the prose-poetic form, that is, passages in verse are inserted here and
there in the narrative. In a few cases they are quoted, but for the most
part they are the original compositions of the novelist. They range in
length from couplets to poems of three hundred lines. Sometimes they form
an integral part of the narrative, or again they illustrate a point,
elaborate an idea in poetry, or are exercises in verse.

We have tried to bring out the characteristic features of this romance in
order that we may see what the essential elements are of the problem which
faces one in attempting to explain the origin of the type of literature
represented by the work of Petronius. What was there in antecedent
literature which will help us to understand the appearance on Italian soil
in the first century of our era of a long erotic story of adventure,
dealing in a realistic way with every-day life, marked by a satirical
tone and with a leaning toward the prose-poetic form? This is the question
raised by the analysis, which we have made above, of the characteristics
of the story. We have no ambitious hope of solving it, yet the mere
statement of a puzzling but interesting problem is stimulating to the
imagination and the intellect, and I am tempted to take up the subject
because the discovery of certain papyri in Egypt within recent years has
led to the formulation of a new theory of the origin of the romance of
perilous adventure, and may, therefore, throw some light on the source of
our realistic novel of every-day life. My purpose, then, is to speak
briefly of the different genres of literature of the earlier period with
which the story of Petronius may stand in some direct relation, or from
which the suggestion may have come to Petronius for his work. Several of
these lines of possible descent have been skilfully traced by others. In
their views here and there I have made some modifications, and I have
called attention to one or two types of literature, belonging to the
earlier period and heretofore unnoticed in this connection, which may help
us to understand the appearance of the realistic novel.

It seems a far cry from this story of sordid motives and vulgar action to
the heroic episodes of epic poetry, and yet the _Satirae_ contain not a
few more or less direct suggestions of epic situations and characters. The
conventional motif of the story of Petronius is the wrath of an offended
deity. The narrative in the _Odyssey_ and the _Æneid_ rests on the same
basis. The ship of their enemy Lichas on which Encolpius and his
companions are cooped up reminds them of the cave of the Cyclops; Giton
hiding from the town-crier under a mattress is compared to Ulysses
underneath the sheep and clinging to its wool to escape the eye of the
Cyclops, while the woman whose charms engage the attention of Encolpius at
Croton bears the name of Circe. It seems to be clear from these
reminiscences that Petronius had the epic in mind when he wrote his story,
and his novel may well be a direct or an indirect parody of an epic
narrative. Rohde in his analysis of the serious Greek romance of the
centuries subsequent to Petronius has postulated the following development
for that form of story: Travellers returning from remote parts of the
world told remarkable stories of their experiences. Some of these stories
took a literary form in the _Odyssey_ and the Tales of the Argonauts. They
appeared in prose, too, in narratives like the story of Sinbad the Sailor,
of a much later date. A more definite plot and a greater dramatic
intensity were given to these tales of adventure by the addition of an
erotic element which often took the form of two separated lovers. Some use
is made of this element, for instance, in the relations of Odysseus and
Penelope, perhaps in the episode of Æneas and Dido, and in the story of
Jason and Medea. The intrusion of the love motif into the stories told of
demigods and heroes, so that the whole narrative turns upon it, is
illustrated by such tales in the Metamorphoses of Ovid as those of Pyramus
and Thisbe, Pluto and Proserpina, or Meleager and Atalanta. The love
element, which may have been developed in this way out of its slight use
in the epic, and the element of adventure form the basis of the serious
Greek romances of Antonius Diogenes, Achilles Tatius, and the other
writers of the centuries which follow Petronius.

Before trying to connect the _Satirae_ with a serious romance of the type
just mentioned, let us follow another line of descent which leads us to
the same objective point, viz., the appearance of the serious story in
prose. We have been led to consider the possible connection of this kind
of prose fiction with the epic by the presence in both of them of the love
element and that of adventure. But the Greek novel has another rather
marked feature. It is rhetorical, and this quality has suggested that it
may have come, not from the epic, but from the rhetorical exercise.
Support has been given to this theory within recent years by the discovery
in Egypt of two fragments of the Ninos romance. The first of these
fragments reveals Ninos, the hero, pleading with his aunt Derkeia, the
mother of his sweetheart, for permission to marry his cousin. All the
arguments in support of his plea and against it are put forward and
balanced one against the other in a very systematic way. He wins over
Derkeia. Later in the same fragment the girl pleads in a somewhat similar
fashion with Thambe, the mother of Ninos. The second fragment is mainly
concerned with the campaigns of Ninos. Here we have the two lovers,
probably separated by the departure of Ninos for the wars, while the
hero, at least, is exposed to the danger of the campaign.

The point was made after the text of this find had been published that the
large part taken in the tale by the carefully balanced arguments indicated
that the story grew out of exercises in argumentation in the rhetorical
schools.[83] The elder Seneca has preserved for us in his _Controversiae_
specimens of the themes which were set for students in these schools. The
student was asked to imagine himself in a supposed dilemma and then to
discuss the considerations which would lead him to adopt the one or the
other line of conduct. Some of these situations suggest excellent dramatic
possibilities, conditions of life, for instance, where suicide seemed
justifiable, misadventures with pirates, or a turn of affairs which
threatened a woman's virtue. Before the student reached the point of
arguing the case, the story must be told, and out of these narratives of
adventure, told at the outset to develop the dilemma, may have grown the
romance of adventure, written for its own sake. The story of Ninos has a
peculiar interest in connection with this theory, because it was probably
very short, and consequently may give us the connecting link between the
rhetorical exercise and the long novel of the later period, and because it
is the earliest known serious romance. On the back of the papyrus which
contains it are some farm accounts of the year 101 A.D. Evidently by that
time the roll had become waste paper, and the story itself may have been
composed a century or even two centuries earlier. So far as this second
theory is concerned, we may raise the question in passing whether we have
any other instance of a genre of literature growing out of a school-boy
exercise. Usually the teacher adapts to his purpose some form of creative
literature already in existence.

Leaving this objection out of account for the moment, the romance of love
and perilous adventure may possibly be then a lineal descendant either of
the epic or of the rhetorical exercise. Whichever of these two views is
the correct one, the discovery of the Ninos romance fills in a gap in one
theory of the origin of the realistic romance of Petronius, and with that
we are here concerned. Before the story of Ninos was found, no serious
romance and no title of such a romance anterior to the time of Petronius
was known. This story, as we have seen, may well go back to the first
century before Christ, or at least to the beginning of our era. It is
conceivable that stories like it, but now lost, existed even at an earlier
date. Now in the century, more or less, which elapsed between the assumed
date of the appearance of these Greek narratives and the time of
Petronius, the extraordinary commercial development of Rome had created a
new aristocracy--the aristocracy of wealth. In harmony with this social
change the military chieftain and the political leader who had been the
heroes of the old fiction gave way to the substantial man of affairs of
the new, just as Thaddeus of Warsaw has yielded his place in our
present-day novels to Silas Lapham, and the bourgeois erotic story of
adventure resulted, as we find it in the extant Greek novels of the second
and third centuries of our era. If we can assume that this stage of
development was reached before the time of Petronius we can think of his
novel as a parody of such a romance. If, however, the bourgeois romance
had not appeared before 50 A.D., then, if we regard his story as a parody
of a prose narrative, it must be a parody of such an heroic romance as
that of Ninos, or a parody of the longer heroic romances which developed
out of the rhetorical narrative. If excavations in Egypt or at Herculaneum
should bring to light a serious bourgeois story of adventure, they would
furnish us the missing link. Until, or unless, such a discovery is made
the chain of evidence is incomplete.

The two theories of the realistic romance which we have been discussing
assume that it is a parody of some anterior form of literature, and that
this fact accounts for the appearance of the satirical or cynical element
in it. Other students of literary history, however, think that this
characteristic was brought over directly from the Milesian tale[84] or the
Menippean satire.[85] To how many different kinds of stories the term
"Milesian tale" was applied by the ancients is a matter of dispute, but
the existence of the short story before the time of Petronius is beyond
question. Indeed we find specimens of it. In its commonest form it
presented a single episode of every-day life. It brought out some human
weakness or foible. Very often it was a story of illicit love. Its
philosophy of life was: No man's honesty and no woman's virtue are
unassailable. In all these respects, save in the fact that it presents one
episode only, it resembles the _Satirae_ of Petronius. At least two
stories of this type are to be found in the extant fragments of the novel
of Petronius. One of them is related as a well-known tale by the poet
Eumolpus, and the other is told by him as a personal experience. More than
a dozen of them are imbedded in the novel of Apuleius, the
_Metamorphoses_, and modern specimens of them are to be seen in Boccaccio
and in Chaucer. In fact they are popular from the twelfth century down to
the eighteenth. Long before the time of Petronius they occur sporadically
in literature. A good specimen, for instance, is found in a letter
commonly attributed to Æschines in the fourth century B.C. As early as
the first century before Christ collections of them had been made and
translated into Latin. This development suggests an interesting possible
origin of the realistic romance. In such collections as those just
mentioned of the first century B.C., the central figures were different in
the different stories, as is the case, for instance, in the Canterbury
Tales. Such an original writer as Petronius was may well have thought of
connecting these different episodes by making them the experiences of a
single individual. The Encolpius of Petronius would in that case be in a
way an ancient Don Juan. If we compare the Arabian Nights with one of the
groups of stories found in the Romances of the Round Table, we can see
what this step forward would mean. The tales which bear the title of the
Arabian Nights all have the same general setting and the same general
treatment, and they are put in the mouth of the same story-teller. The
Lancelot group of Round Table stories, however, shows a nearer approach to
unity since the stories in it concern the same person, and have a common
ultimate purpose, even if it is vague. When this point had been reached
the realistic romance would have made its appearance. We have been
thinking of the realistic novel as being made up of a series of Milesian
tales. We may conceive of it, however, as an expanded Milesian tale, just
as scholars are coming to think of the epic as growing out of a single
hero-song, rather than as resulting from the union of several such songs.

To pass to another possibility, it is very tempting to see a connection
between the _Satirae_ of Petronius and the prologue of comedy. Plautus
thought it necessary to prefix to many of his plays an account of the
incidents which preceded the action of the play. In some cases he went so
far as to outline in the prologue the action of the play itself in order
that the spectators might follow it intelligently. This introductory
narrative runs up to seventy-six lines in the _Menaechmi_, to eighty-two
in the _Rudens_, and to one hundred and fifty-two in the _Amphitruo_. In
this way it becomes a short realistic story of every-day people, involving
frequently a love intrigue, and told in the iambic senarius, the simplest
form of verse. Following it is the more extended narrative of the comedy
itself, with its incidents and dialogue. This combination of the
condensed narrative in the story form, presented usually as a monologue in
simple verse, and the expanded narrative in the dramatic form, with its
conversational element, may well have suggested the writing of a realistic
novel in prose. A slight, though not a fatal, objection to this theory
lies in the fact that the prologues to comedy subsequent to Plautus
changed in their character, and contain little narrative. This is not a
serious objection, for the plays of Plautus were still known to the
cultivated in the later period.

The mime gives us still more numerous points of contact with the work of
Petronius than comedy does.[86] It is unfortunate, both for our
understanding of Roman life and for our solution of the question before
us, that only fragments of this form of dramatic composition have come
down to us. Even from them, however, it is clear that the mime dealt with
every-day life in a very frank, realistic way. The new comedy has its
conventions in the matter of situations and language. The matron, for
instance, must not be presented in a questionable light, and the language
is the conversational speech of the better classes. The mime recognizes no
such restrictions in its portrayal of life. The married woman, her stupid
husband, and her lover are common figures in this form of the drama, and
if we may draw an inference from the lately discovered fragments of Greek
mimes, the speech was that of the common people. Again, the new comedy has
its limited list of stock characters--the old man, the tricky slave, the
parasite, and the others which we know so well in Plautus and Terence, but
as for the mime, any figure to be seen on the street may find a place in
it--the rhetorician, the soldier, the legacy-hunter, the inn-keeper, or
the town-crier. The doings of kings and heroes were parodied. We are even
told that a comic Hector and Achilles were put on the stage, and the gods
did not come off unscathed. All of these characteristic features of the
mime remind us in a striking way of the novel of Petronius. His work, like
the mime, is a realistic picture of low life which presents a great
variety of characters and shows no regard for conventional morals. It is
especially interesting to notice the element of parody, which we have
already observed in Petronius, in both kinds of literary productions. The
theory that Petronius may have had the composition of his _Satirae_
suggested to him by plays of this type is greatly strengthened by the fact
that the mime reached its highest point of popularity at the court in the
time of Nero, in whose reign Petronius lived. In point of fact Petronius
refers to the mime frequently. One of these passages is of peculiar
significance in this connection. Encolpius and his comrades are entering
the town of Croton and are considering what device they shall adopt so as
to live without working. At last a happy idea occurs to Eumolpus, and he
says: "Why don't we construct a mime?" and the mime is played, with
Eumolpus as a fabulously rich man at the point of death, and the others as
his attendants. The rôle makes a great hit, and all the vagabonds in the
company play their assumed parts in their daily life at Croton with such
skill that the legacy-hunters of the place load them with attentions and
shower them with presents. This whole episode, in fact, may be thought of
as a mime cast in the narrative form, and the same conception may be
applied with great plausibility to the entire story of Encolpius.

We have thus far been attacking the question with which we are concerned
from the side of the subject-matter and tone of the story of Petronius.
Another method of approach is suggested by the Menippean satire,[87] the
best specimens of which have come down to us in the fragments of Varro,
one of Cicero's contemporaries. These satires are an _olla podrida_,
dealing with all sorts of subjects in a satirical manner, sometimes put in
the dialogue form and cast in a _mélange_ of prose and verse. It is this
last characteristic which is of special interest to us in this connection,
because in the prose of Petronius verses are freely used. Sometimes, as we
have observed above, they form an integral part of the narrative, and
again they merely illustrate or expand a point touched on in the prose. If
it were not aside from our immediate purpose it would be interesting to
follow the history of this prose-poetical form from the time of Petronius
on. After him it does not seem to have been used very much until the third
and fourth centuries of our era. However, Martial in the first century
prefixed a prose prologue to five books of his Epigrams, and one of these
prologues ends with a poem of four lines. The several books of the
_Silvae_ of Statius are also preceded by prose letters of dedication. That
strange imitation of the _Aulularia_ of Plautus, of the fourth century,
the _Querolus_, is in a form half prose and half verse. A sentence begins
in prose and runs off into verse, as some of the epitaphs also do. The
Epistles of Ausonius of the same century are compounded of prose and a
great variety of verse. By the fifth and sixth centuries, a _mélange_ of
verse or a combination of prose and verse is very common, as one can see
in the writings of Martianus Capella, Sidonius Apollinaris, Ennodius, and
Boethius. It recurs again in modern times, for instance in Dante's _La
Vita Nuova_, in Boccaccio, _Aucassin et Nicolette_, the _Heptameron_, the
_Celtic Ballads_, the _Arabian Nights_, and in _Alice in Wonderland_.

A little thought suggests that the prose-poetic form is a natural medium
of expression. A change from prose to verse, or from one form of verse to
another, suggests a change in the emotional condition of a speaker or
writer. We see that clearly enough illustrated in tragedy or comedy. In
the thrilling scene in the _Captives of Plautus_, for example, where
Tyndarus is in mortal terror lest the trick which he has played on his
master, Hegio, may be discovered, and he be consigned to work in chains in
the quarries, the verse is the trochaic septenarius. As soon as the
suspense is over, it drops to the iambic senarius. If we should arrange
the commoner Latin verses in a sequence according to the emotional effects
which they produce, at the bottom of the series would stand the iambic
senarius. Above that would come trochaic verse, and we should rise to
higher planes of exaltation as we read the anapæstic, or cretic, or
bacchiac. The greater part of life is commonplace. Consequently the common
medium for conversation or for the narrative in a composition like comedy
made up entirely of verse is the senarius. Now this form of verse in its
simple, almost natural, quantitative arrangement is very close to prose,
and it would be a short step to substitute prose for it as the basis of
the story, interspersing verse here and there to secure variety, or when
the emotions were called into play, just as lyric verses are interpolated
in the iambic narrative. In this way the combination of different kinds
of verse in the drama, and the prosimetrum of the Menippean satire and of
Petronius, may be explained, and we see a possible line of descent from
comedy and this form of satire to the _Satirae_.

These various theories of the origin of the romance of Petronius--that it
may be related to the epic, to the serious heroic romance, to the
bourgeois story of adventure developed out of the rhetorical exercise, to
the Milesian tale, to the prologue of comedy, to the _verse-mélange_ of
comedy or the mime, or to the prose-poetical Menippean satire--are not, of
necessity, it seems to me, mutually exclusive. His novel may well be
thought of as a parody of the serious romance, with frequent reminiscences
of the epic, a parody suggested to him by comedy and its prologue, by the
mime, or by the short cynical Milesian tale, and cast in the form of the
Menippean satire; or, so far as subject-matter and realistic treatment are
concerned, the suggestion may have come directly from the mime, and if we
can accept the theory of some scholars who have lately studied the mime,
that it sometimes contained both prose and verse, we may be inclined to
regard this type of literature as the immediate progenitor of the novel,
even in the matter of external form, and leave the Menippean satire out of
the line of descent. Whether the one or the other of these explanations of
its origin recommends itself to us as probable, it is interesting to note,
as we leave the subject, that, so far as our present information goes, the
realistic romance seems to have been the invention of Petronius.




Diocletian's Edict and the High Cost of Living



The history of the growth of paternalism in the Roman Empire is still to
be written. It would be a fascinating and instructive record. In it the
changes in the character of the Romans and in their social and economic
conditions would come out clearly. It would disclose a strange mixture of
worthy and unworthy motives in their statesmen and politicians, who were
actuated sometimes by sympathy for the poor, sometimes by a desire for
popular favor, by an honest wish to check extravagance or immorality, or
by the fear that the discontent of the masses might drive them into
revolution. We should find the Roman people, recognizing the menace to
their simple, frugal way of living which lay in the inroads of Greek
civilization, and turning in their helplessness to their officials, the
censors, to protect them from a demoralization which, by their own
efforts, they could not withstand. We should find the same officials
preaching against race suicide, extravagant living, and evasion of public
duties, and imposing penalties and restrictions in the most autocratic
fashion on men of high and low degree alike who failed to adopt the
official standards of conduct. We should read of laws enacted in the same
spirit, laws restricting the number of guests that might be entertained on
a single occasion, and prescribing penalties for guests and host alike, if
the cost of a dinner exceeded the statutory limit. All this belongs to the
early stage of paternal government. The motives were praiseworthy, even if
the results were futile.

With the advent of the Gracchi, toward the close of the second century
before our era, moral considerations become less noticeable, and
paternalism takes on a more philanthropic and political character. We see
this change reflected in the land laws and the corn laws. To take up first
the free distribution of land by the state, in the early days of the
Republic colonies of citizens were founded in the newly conquered
districts of Italy to serve as garrisons on the frontier. It was a fair
bargain between the citizen and the state. He received land, the state,
protection. But with Tiberius Gracchus a change comes in. His colonists
were to be settled in peaceful sections of Italy; they were to receive
land solely because of their poverty. This was socialism or state
philanthropy. Like the agrarian bill of Tiberius, the corn law of Gaius
Gracchus, which provided for the sale of grain below the market price, was
a paternal measure inspired in part by sympathy for the needy. The
political element is clear in both cases also. The people who were thus
favored by assignments of land and of food naturally supported the leaders
who assisted them. Perhaps the extensive building of roads which Gaius
Gracchus carried on should be mentioned in this connection. The ostensible
purpose of these great highways, perhaps their primary purpose, was to
develop Italy and to facilitate communication between different parts of
the peninsula, but a large number of men was required for their
construction, and Gaius Gracchus may well have taken the matter up, partly
for the purpose of furnishing work to the unemployed. Out of these small
beginnings developed the socialistic policy of later times. By the middle
of the first century B.C., it is said that there were three hundred and
twenty thousand persons receiving doles of corn from the state, and, if
the people could look to the government for the necessities of life, why
might they not hope to have it supply their less pressing needs? Or, to
put it in another way, if one politician won their support by giving them
corn, why might not another increase his popularity by providing them with
amusement and with the comforts of life? Presents of oil and clothing
naturally follow, the giving of games and theatrical performances at the
expense of the state, and the building of porticos and public baths. As
the government and wealthy citizens assumed a larger measure of
responsibility for the welfare of the citizens, the people became more and
more dependent upon them and less capable of managing their own affairs.
An indication of this change we see in the decline of local
self-government and the assumption by the central administration of
responsibility for the conduct of public business in the towns of Italy.
This last consideration suggests another phase of Roman history which a
study of paternalism would bring out--I mean the effect of its
introduction on the character of the Roman people.

The history of paternalism in Rome, when it is written, might approach
the subject from several different points. If the writer were inclined to
interpret history on the economic side, he might find the explanation of
the change in the policy of the government toward its citizens in the
introduction of slave labor which, under the Republic, drove the free
laborer to the wall and made him look to the state for help, in the
decline of agriculture, and the growth of capitalism. The sociologist
would notice the drift of the people toward the cities and the sudden
massing there of large numbers of persons who could not provide for
themselves and in their discontent might overturn society. The historian
who concerns himself with political changes mainly, would notice the
socialistic legislation of the Gracchi and their political successors and
would connect the growth of paternalism with the development of democracy.
In all these explanations there would be a certain measure of truth.

But I am not planning here to write a history of paternalism among the
Romans. That is one of the projects which I had been reserving for the day
when the Carnegie Foundation should present me with a wooden sword and
allow me to retire from the arena of academic life. But, alas! the
trustees of that beneficent institution, by the revision which they have
lately made of the conditions under which a university professor may
withdraw from active service, have in their wisdom put off that day of
academic leisure to the Greek Kalends, and my dream vanishes into the
distance with it.

Here I wish to present only an episode in this history which we have been
discussing, an episode which is unique, however, in ancient and, so far as
I know, in modern history. Our knowledge of the incident comes from an
edict of the Emperor Diocletian, and this document has a direct bearing on
a subject of present-day discussion, because it contains a diatribe
against the high cost of living and records the heroic attempt which the
Roman government made to reduce it. In his effort to bring prices down to
what he considered a normal level, Diocletian did not content himself with
such half-measures as we are trying in our attempts to suppress
combinations in restraint of trade, but he boldly fixed the maximum prices
at which beef, grain, eggs, clothing, and other articles could be sold,
and prescribed the penalty of death for any one who disposed of his wares
at a higher figure. His edict is a very comprehensive document, and
specifies prices for seven hundred or eight hundred different articles.
This systematic attempt to regulate trade was very much in keeping with
the character of Diocletian and his theory of government. Perhaps no Roman
emperor, with the possible exception of Hadrian, showed such extraordinary
administrative ability and proposed so many sweeping social reforms as
Diocletian did. His systematic attempt to suppress Christianity is a case
in point, and in the last twenty years of his reign he completely
reorganized the government. He frankly introduced the monarchical
principle, fixed upon a method of succession to the throne, redivided the
provinces, established a carefully graded system of officials, concerned
himself with court etiquette and dress, and reorganized the coinage and
the system of taxation. We are not surprised therefore that he had the
courage to attack this difficult question of high prices, and that his
plan covered almost all the articles which his subjects would have
occasion to buy.

It is almost exactly two centuries since the first fragments of the edict
dealing with the subject were brought to light. They were discovered in
Caria, in 1709, by William Sherard, the English consul at Smyrna. Since
then, from time to time, other fragments of tablets containing parts of
the edict have been found in Egypt, Asia Minor, and Greece. At present
portions of twenty-nine copies of it are known. Fourteen of them are in
Latin and fifteen in Greek. The Greek versions differ from one another,
while the Latin texts are identical, except for the stone-cutters'
mistakes here and there. These facts make it clear that the original
document was in Latin, and was translated into Greek by the local
officials of each town where the tablets were set up. We have already
noticed that specimens of the edict have not been found outside of Egypt,
Greece, and Asia Minor, and this was the part of the Roman world where
Diocletian ruled. Scholars have also observed that almost all the
manufactured articles which are mentioned come from Eastern points. From
these facts it has been inferred that the edict was to apply to the East
only, or perhaps more probably that Diocletian drew it up for his part of
the Roman world, and that before it could be applied to the West it was
repealed.

From the pieces which were then known, a very satisfactory reconstruction
of the document was made by Mommsen and published in the _Corpus of Latin
Inscriptions_.[88]

The work of restoration was like putting together the parts of a picture
puzzle where some of the pieces are lacking. Fragments are still coming to
light, and possibly we may have the complete text some day. As it is, the
introduction is complete, and perhaps four-fifths of the list of articles
with prices attached are extant. The introduction opens with a stately
list of the titles of the two Augusti and the two Cæsars, which fixes the
date of the proclamation as 301 A.D. Then follows a long recital of the
circumstances which have led the government to adopt this drastic method
of controlling prices. This introduction is one of the most extraordinary
pieces of bombast, mixed metaphors, loose syntax, and incoherent
expressions that Latin literature possesses. One is tempted to infer from
its style that it was the product of Diocletian's own pen. He was a man of
humble origin, and would not live in Rome for fear of being laughed at on
account of his plebeian training. The florid and awkward style of these
introductory pages is exactly what we should expect from a man of such
antecedents.

It is very difficult to translate them into intelligible English, but some
conception of their style and contents may be had from one or two
extracts. In explaining the situation which confronts the world, the
Emperor writes: "For, if the raging avarice ... which, without regard for
mankind, increases and develops by leaps and bounds, we will not say from
year to year, month to month, or day to day, but almost from hour to hour,
and even from minute to minute, could be held in check by some regard for
moderation, or if the welfare of the people could calmly tolerate this mad
license from which, in a situation like this, it suffers in the worst
possible fashion from day to day, some ground would appear, perhaps, for
concealing the truth and saying nothing; ... but inasmuch as there is
only seen a mad desire without control, to pay no heed to the needs of the
many, ... it seems good to us, as we look into the future, to us who are
the fathers of the people, that justice intervene to settle matters
impartially, in order that that which, long hoped for, humanity itself
could not bring about may be secured for the common government of all by
the remedies which our care affords.... Who is of so hardened a heart and
so untouched by a feeling for humanity that he can be unaware, nay that he
has not noticed, that in the sale of wares which are exchanged in the
market, or dealt with in the daily business of the cities, an exorbitant
tendency in prices has spread to such an extent that the unbridled desire
of plundering is held in check neither by abundance nor by seasons of
plenty!"

If we did not know that this was found on tablets sixteen centuries old,
we might think that we were reading a newspaper diatribe against the
cold-storage plant or the beef trust. What the Emperor has decided to do
to remedy the situation he sets forth toward the end of the introduction.
He says: "It is our pleasure, therefore, that those prices which the
subjoined written summary specifies, be held in observance throughout all
our domain, that all may know that license to go above the same has been
cut off.... It is our pleasure (also) that if any man shall have boldly
come into conflict with this formal statute, he shall put his life in
peril.... In the same peril also shall he be placed who, drawn along by
avarice in his desire to buy, shall have conspired against these statutes.
Nor shall he be esteemed innocent of the same crime who, having articles
necessary for daily life and use, shall have decided hereafter that they
can be held back, since the punishment ought to be even heavier for him
who causes need than for him who violates the laws."

The lists which follow are arranged in three columns which give
respectively the article, the unit of measure, and the price.[89]

  Frumenti              K̄M̄
  Hordei                K̄M̄ unum     Ⅹ̶ c(entum)
  Centenum sive sicale  " "  "      Ⅹ̶ sexa(ginta)
  Mili pisti            " "  "      Ⅹ̶ centu(m)
  Mili integri          " "         Ⅹ̶ quinquaginta'


   The first item (frumentum) is wheat, which is sold by the K̄M̄
   (kastrensis modius=18½ quarts), but the price is lacking. Barley is
   sold by the kastrensis modius at Ⅹ̶ centum (centum denarii = 43 cents)
   and so on.

Usually a price list is not of engrossing interest, but the tables of
Diocletian furnish us a picture of material conditions throughout the
Empire in his time which cannot be had from any other source, and for that
reason deserve some attention. This consideration emboldens me to set down
some extracts in the following pages from the body of the edict:



Extracts from Diocletian's List of Maximum Prices

I

In the tables given here the Latin and Greek names of the articles listed
have been turned into English. The present-day accepted measure of
quantity--for instance, the bushel or the quart--has been substituted for
the ancient unit, and the corresponding price for the modern unit of
measure is given. Thus barley was to be sold by the kastrensis modius
(=18½ quarts) at 100 denarii (=43.5 cents). At this rate a bushel of
barley would have brought 74.5 cents. For convenience in reference the
numbers of the chapters and of the items adopted in the text of Mommsen
are used here. Only selected articles are given.

    (Unit of Measure, the Bushel)

1       Wheat
2       Barley                                                  74.5 cents
3       Rye                                                     45     "
4       Millet, ground                                          74.5   "
6       Millet, whole                                           37     "
7       Spelt, hulled                                           74.5   "
8       Spelt, not hulled                                       22.5   "
9       Beans, ground                                           74.5   "
10      Beans, not ground                                       45     "
11      Lentils                                                 74.5   "
12-16   Peas, various sorts                                  45-74.5   "
17      Oats                                                    22.5   "
31      Poppy seeds                                          $1.12
34      Mustard                                              $1.12
35      Prepared mustard, quart                                  6     "



    II

    (Unit of Measure, the Quart)

1a      Wine from Picenum                                       22.5 cents
2       Wine from Tibur                                         22.5   "
7       Wine from Falernum                                      22.5   "
10      Wine of the country                                      6     "
11-12   Beer                                                     1.5-3 "



    III

(Unit of Measure, the Quart)

1a      Oil, first quality                                      30.3 cents
2       Oil, second quality                                     18     "
5       Vinegar                                                  4.3   "
8       Salt, bushel                                            74.5   "
10      Honey, best                                             30.3   "
11      Honey, second quality                                   15     "


    IV

    (Unit, Unless Otherwise Noted, Pound Avoirdupois)

1a  Pork                                                         7.3 cents
2   Beef                                                         4.9   "
3   Goat's flesh or mutton                                       4.9   "
6   Pig's liver                                                  9.8   "
8   Ham, best                                                   12     "
21  Goose, artificially fed (1)                                 87     "
22  Goose, not artificially fed (1)                             43.5   "
23  Pair of fowls                                               36     "
29  Pair of pigeons                                             10.5   "
47  Lamb                                                         7.3   "
48  Kid                                                          7.3   "
50  Butter                                                       9.8   "


    V

    (Unit, the Pound)

1a  Sea fish with sharp spines                                  14.6 cents
2   Fish, second quality                                         9.7   "
3   River fish, best quality                                     7.3   "
4   Fish, second quality                                         4.8   "
5   Salt fish                                                    8.3   "
6   Oysters (by the hundred)                                    43.5   "
11  Dry cheese                                                   7.3   "
12  Sardines                                                     9.7   "


    VI

1   Artichokes, large (5)                                        4.3 cents
7   Lettuce, best (5)                                            1.7   "
9   Cabbages, best (5)                                           1.7   "
10  Cabbages, small (10)                                         1.7   "
18  Turnips, large (10)                                          1.7   "
24  Watercress, per bunch of 20                                  4.3   "
28  Cucumbers, first quality (10)                                1.7   "
29  Cucumbers, small (20)                                        1.7   "
34  Garden asparagus, per bunch (25)                             2.6   "
35  Wild asparagus (50)                                          1.7   "
38  Shelled green beans, quart                                   3     "
43  Eggs (4)                                                     1.7   "
46  Snails, large (20)                                           1.7   "
65  Apples, best (10)                                            1.7   "
67  Apples, small (40)                                           1.7   "
78  Figs, best (25)                                              1.7   "
80  Table grapes (2.8 pound)                                     1.7   "
95  Sheep's milk, quart                                          6     "
96  Cheese, fresh, quart                                         6     "


    VII

    (Where (k) Is Set Down the Workman Receives His "Keep" Also)

1a Manual laborer (k)                                           10.8 cents
2  Bricklayer (k)                                               21.6   "
3  Joiner (interior work) (k)                                   21.6   "
3a Carpenter (k)                                                21.6   "
4  Lime-burner (k)                                              21.6   "
5  Marble-worker (k)                                            26     "
6  Mosaic-worker (fine work) (k)                                26     "
7  Stone-mason (k)                                              21.6   "
8  Wall-painter (k)                                             32.4   "
9  Figure-painter (k)                                           64.8   "
10 Wagon-maker (k)                                              21.6   "
11 Smith (k)                                                    21.6   "
12 Baker (k)                                                    21.6   "
13 Ship-builder, for sea-going ships (k)                        26     "
14 Ship-builder, for river boats (k)                            21.6   "
17 Driver, for camel, ass, or mule (k)                          10.8   "
18 Shepherd (k)                                                  8.7   "
20 Veterinary, for cutting, and straightening hoofs, per animal  2.6   "
22 Barber, for each man                                           .9 cent
23 Sheep-shearer, for each sheep (k)                              .9   "
24a Coppersmith, for work in brass, per pound                    3.5 cents
25 Coppersmith, for work in copper, per pound                    2.6   "
26 Coppersmith for finishing vessels, per pound                  2.6   "
27 Coppersmith, for finishing figures and statues, per pound     1.7   "
29 Maker of statues, etc., per day (k)                          32.4   "
31 Water-carrier, per day (k)                                   10.9   "
32 Sewer-cleaner, per day (k)                                   10.9   "
33 Knife-grinder, for old sabre                                 10.9   "
36 Knife-grinder, for double axe                                 3.5   "
39 Writer, 100 lines best writing                               10.9   "
40 Writer, 100 lines ordinary writing                            8.7   "
41 Document writer for record of 100 lines                       4.3   "
42 Tailor, for cutting out and finishing overgarment of first
     quality                                                    26.1   "
43 Tailor, for cutting out and finishing overgarment of second
     quality                                                    17.4   "
44 For a large cowl                                             10.9   "
45 For a small cowl                                              8.7   "
46 For trousers                                                  8.7   "
52 Felt horse-blanket, black or white, 3 pounds weight          43.5   "
53 Cover, first quality, with embroidery, 3 pounds weight    $1.09
64 Gymnastic teacher, per pupil, per month                      21.6 cents
65 Employee to watch children, per child, per month             21.6   "
66 Elementary teacher, per pupil, per month                     21.6   "
67 Teacher of arithmetic, per pupil, per month                  32.6   "
68 Teacher of stenography, per pupil, per month                 32.6   "
69 Writing-teacher, per pupil, per month                        21.6   "
70 Teacher of Greek, Latin, geometry, per pupil, per month      87     "
71 Teacher of rhetoric, per pupil, per month                 $1.09
72 Advocate or counsel for presenting a case                 $1.09
73 For finishing a case                                      $4.35
74 Teacher of architecture, per pupil, per month                43.5 cents
75 Watcher of clothes in public bath, for each patron             .9 cent


    VIII

1a Hide, Babylonian, first quality                         $2.17
 2 Hide, Babylonian, second quality                           $1.74
 4 Hide, Phœnician (?)                                           43   cents
6a Cowhide, unworked, first quality                       $2.17
 7 Cowhide, prepared for shoe soles                           $3.26
 9 Hide, second quality, unworked                             $1.31
10 Hide, second quality, worked                              $2.17
11 Goatskin, large, unworked                                    17   cents
12 Goatskin, large, worked                                      22     "
13 Sheepskin, large, unworked                                    8.7   "
14 Sheepskin, large, worked                                     18     "
17 Kidskin, unworked                                             4.3   "
18 Kidskin, worked                                               7     "
27 Wolfskin, unworked                                           10.8   "
28 Wolfskin, worked                                             17.4   "
33 Bearskin, large, unworked                                    43     "
39 Leopardskin, unworked                                     $4.35
41 Lionskin, worked                                          $4.35


    IX

5a Boots, first quality, for mule-drivers and peasants, per
     pair, without nails                                         52  cents
 6 Soldiers' boots, without nails                                43    "
 7 Patricians' shoes                                             65    "
 8 Senatorial shoes                                              43    "
 9 Knights' shoes                                                30.5  "
10 Women's boots                                                 26    "
11 Soldiers' shoes                                               32.6  "
15 Cowhide shoes for women, double soles                         21.7  "
16 Cowhide shoes for women, single soles                         13    "
20 Men's slippers                                                26    "
21 Women's slippers                                              21.7  "


    XVI

8a Sewing-needle, finest quality                                 1.7 cents
 9 Sewing-needle, second quality                                  .9 cent


    XVII

 1 Transportation, 1 person, 1 mile                               .9 cent
 2 Rent for wagon, 1 mile                                        5   cents
 3 Freight charges for wagon containing up to 1,200 pounds, per
     mile                                                        8.7   "
 4 Freight charges for camel load of 600 pounds,
     per mile                                                    3.5   "
 5 Rent for laden ass, per mile                                  1.8   "
 7 Hay and straw, 3 pounds                                        .9 cent


    XVIII

 1a Goose-quills, per pound                                     43.5 cents
11a Ink, per pound                                               5     "
12  Reed pens from Paphos (10)                                   1.7   "
13  Reed pens, second quality (20)                               1.7   "


    XIX

 1  Military mantle, finest quality                         $17.40
 2  Undergarment, fine                                       $8.70
 3  Undergarment, ordinary                                   $5.44
 5 White bed blanket, finest sort, 12 pounds weight          $6.96
 7 Ordinary cover, 10 pounds weight                          $2.18
28 Laodicean Dalmatica [_i.e., a tunic with sleeves_]        $8.70
36 British mantle, with cowl                                $26.08
39 Numidian mantle, with cowl                               $13.04
42 African mantle, with cowl                                 $6.52
51 Laodicean storm coat, finest quality                     $21.76
60 Gallic soldier's cloak                                   $43.78
61 African soldier's cloak                                   $2.17


    XX

 1a For an embroiderer, for embroidering a half-silk
      undergarment, per ounce                                   87   cents
 5 For a gold embroiderer, if he work in gold, for finest
      work, per ounce                                        $4.35
 9 For a silk weaver, who works on stuff half-silk, besides
      "keep," per day                                           11   cents


    XXI

 2 For working Tarentine or Laodicean or other foreign wool,
     with keep, per pound                                       13   cents
 5 A linen weaver for fine work, with keep, per day             18     "


    XXII

 4 Fuller's charges for a cloak or mantle, new                  13   cents
 6 Fuller's charges for a woman's coarse Dalmatica, new         21.7   "
 9 Fuller's charges for a new half-silk undergarment            76     "
22 Fuller's charges for a new Laodicean mantle.                 76     "


    XXIII

 1 White silk, per pound                                    $52.22


    XXIV

 1 Genuine purple silk, per pound                          $652.20
 2 Genuine purple wool, per pound                          $217.40
 3 Genuine light purple wool, per pound                    $139.26
 8 Nicæan scarlet wool, per pound                            $6.53


    XXV

 1 Washed Tarentine wool, per pound                             76   cents
 2 Washed Laodicean wool, per pound                             65     "
 3 Washed wool from Asturia, per pound                          43.5   "
 4 Washed wool, best medium quality, per pound                  21.7   "
 5 All other washed wools, per pound                            10.8   "


    XXVI

 7a Coarse linen thread, first quality, per pound            $3.13
 8 Coarse linen thread, second quality, per pound           $2.61
 9 Coarse linen thread, third quality, per pound            $1.96


    XXX

 1 Pure gold in bars or in coined pieces, per pound         50,000  denarii
 3 Artificers, working in metal, per pound                 $21.76
 4 Gold-beaters, per pound                                 $13.06


Throughout the lists, as one may see, articles are grouped in a systematic
way. First we find grain and vegetables; then wine, oil, vinegar, salt,
honey, meat, fish, cheese, salads, and nuts. After these articles, in
chapter VII, we pass rather unexpectedly to the wages of the field
laborer, the carpenter, the painter, and of other skilled and unskilled
workmen. Then follow leather, shoes, saddles, and other kinds of raw
material and manufactured wares until we reach a total of more than eight
hundred articles. As we have said, the classification is in the main
systematic, but there are some strange deviations from a systematic
arrangement. Eggs, for instance, are in table VI with salads, vegetables,
and fruits. Bücher, who has discussed some phases of this price list, has
acutely surmised that perhaps the tables in whole, or in part, were drawn
up by the directors of imperial factories and magazines. The government
levied tribute "in kind," and it must have provided depots throughout the
provinces for the reception of contributions from its subjects.
Consequently in making out these tables it would very likely call upon the
directors of these magazines for assistance, and each of them in making
his report would naturally follow to some extent the list of articles
which the imperial depot controlled by him, carried in stock. At all
events, we see evidence of an expert hand in the list of linens, which
includes one hundred and thirty-nine articles of different qualities.

As we have noticed in the passage quoted from the introduction, it is
unlawful for a person to charge more for any of his wares than the amount
specified in the law. Consequently, the prices are not normal, but maximum
prices. However, since the imperial lawgivers evidently believed that the
necessities of life were being sold at exorbitant rates, the maximum which
they fixed was very likely no greater than the prevailing market price.
Here and there, as in the nineteenth chapter of the document, the text is
given in tablets from two or more places. In such cases the prices are the
same, so that apparently no allowance was made for the cost of carriage,
although with some articles, like oysters and sea-fish, this item must
have had an appreciable value, and it certainly should have been taken
into account in fixing the prices of "British mantles" or "Gallic
soldiers' cloaks" of chapter XIX. The quantities for which prices are
given are so small--a pint of wine, a pair of fowls, twenty snails, ten
apples, a bunch of asparagus--that evidently Diocletian had the "ultimate
consumer" in mind, and fixed the retail price in his edict. This is
fortunate for us, because it helps us to get at the cost of living in the
early part of the fourth century. There is good reason for believing that
the system of barter prevailed much more generally at that time than it
does to-day. Probably the farmer often exchanged his grain, vegetables,
and eggs for shoes and cloth, without receiving or paying out money, so
that the money prices fixed for his products would not affect him in every
transaction as they would affect the present-day farmer. The unit of money
which is used throughout the edict is the copper denarius, and fortunately
the value of a pound of fine gold is given as 50,000 denarii. This fixes
the value of the denarius as .4352 cent, or approximately four-tenths of a
cent. It is implied in the introduction that the purpose of the law is to
protect the people, and especially the soldiers, from extortion, but
possibly, as Bücher has surmised, the emperor may have wished to maintain
or to raise the value of the denarius, which had been steadily declining
because of the addition of alloy to the coin. If this was the emperor's
object, possibly the value of the denarius is set somewhat too high, but
it probably does not materially exceed its exchange value, and in any
case, the relative values of articles given in the tables are not
affected.

The tables bring out a number of points of passing interest. From chapter
II it seems to follow that Italian wines retained their ancient
pre-eminence, even in the fourth century. They alone are quoted among the
foreign wines. Table VI gives us a picture of the village market. On
market days the farmer brings his artichokes, lettuce, cabbages, turnips,
and other fresh vegetables into the market town and exposes them for sale
in the public square, as the country people in Italy do to-day. The
seventh chapter, in which wages are given, is perhaps of liveliest
interest. In this connection we should bear in mind the fact that slavery
existed in the Roman Empire, that owners of slaves trained them to various
occupations and hired them out by the day or job, and that, consequently
the prices paid for slave labor fixed the scale of wages. However, there
was a steady decline under the Empire in the number of slaves, and
competition with them in the fourth century did not materially affect the
wages of the free laborer. It is interesting, in this chapter, to notice
that the teacher and the advocate (Nos. 66-73) are classed with the
carpenter and tailor. It is a pleasant passing reflection for the teacher
of Greek and Latin to find that his predecessors were near the top of
their profession, if we may draw this inference from their remuneration
when compared with that of other teachers. It is worth observing also that
the close association between the classics and mathematics, and their
acceptance as the corner-stone of the higher training, to which we have
been accustomed for centuries, seems to be recognized (VII, 70) even at
this early date. We expect to find the physician mentioned with the
teacher and advocate, but probably it was too much even for Diocletian's
skill, in reducing things to a system, to estimate the comparative value
of a physician's services in a case of measles and typhoid fever.

The bricklayer, the joiner, and the carpenter (VII, 2-3a), inasmuch as
they work on the premises of their employer, receive their "keep" as well
as a fixed wage, while the knife-grinder and the tailor (VII, 33, 42)
work in their own shops, and naturally have their meals at home. The
silk-weaver (XX, 9) and the linen-weaver (XXI, 5) have their "keep" also,
which seems to indicate that private houses had their own looms, which is
quite in harmony with the practices of our fathers. The carpenter and
joiner are paid by the day, the teacher by the month, the knife-grinder,
the tailor, the barber (VII, 22) by the piece, and the coppersmith (VII,
24a-27) according to the amount of metal which he uses. Whether the
difference between the prices of shoes for the patrician, the senator, and
the knight (IX, 7-9) represents a difference in the cost of making the
three kinds, or is a tax put on the different orders of nobility, cannot
be determined. The high prices set on silk and wool dyed with purple
(XXIV) correspond to the pre-eminent position of that imperial color in
ancient times. The tables which the edict contains call our attention to
certain striking differences between ancient and modern industrial and
economic conditions. Of course the list of wage-earners is incomplete. The
inscriptions which the trades guilds have left us record many occupations
which are not mentioned here, but in them and in these lists we miss any
reference to large groups of men who hold a prominent place in our modern
industrial reports--I mean men working in printing-offices, factories,
foundries, and machine-shops, and employed by transportation companies.
Nothing in the document suggests the application of power to the
manufacture of articles, the assembling of men in a common workshop, or
the use of any other machine than the hand loom and the mill for the
grinding of corn. In the way of articles offered for sale, we miss certain
items which find a place in every price-list of household necessities,
such articles as sugar, molasses, potatoes, cotton cloth, tobacco, coffee,
and tea. The list of stimulants (II) is, in fact, very brief, including as
it does only a few kinds of wine and beer.

At the present moment, when the high cost of living is a subject which
engages the attention of the economist, politician, and householder, as it
did that of Diocletian and his contemporaries, the curious reader will
wish to know how wages and the prices of food in 301 A.D. compare with
those of to-day. In the two tables which follow, such a comparison is
attempted for some of the more important articles and occupations.

  Articles of Food[90]

                                   Price in 301 A.D.     Price in 1906 A.D.

  Wheat, per bushel                  33.6 cents           $1.19[91]
  Rye, per bushel                    45     "                79   cents[91]
  Beans, per bushel                  45     "             $3.20
  Barley, per bushel                 74.5   "                55   cents[91]
  Vinegar, per quart                  4.3   "                 5-7    "
  Fresh pork, per pound               7.3   "                14-16   "
  Beef, per pound                     4.9   "               { 9-12   "
                                                            {15-18   "
  Mutton, per pound                   4.9   "                13-16   "
  Ham, per pound                     12     "                18-25   "
  Fowls, per pair                    26     "
  Fowls, per pound                                           14-18   "
  Butter, per pound                   9.8   "                26-32   "
  Fish, river, fresh, per pound       7.3   "                12-15   "
  Fish, sea, fresh, per pound         9-14  "                 8-14 cents
  Fish, salt, per pound               8.3   "                 8-15   "
  Cheese, per pound                   7.3   "                17-20   "
  Eggs, per dozen                     5.1   "                25-30   "
  Milk, cow's, per quart                                      6-8    "
  Milk, sheep's, per quart            6     "


  Wages Per Day

  Unskilled workman                  10.8 cents (k)[92] $1.20-2.24[93]
  Bricklayer                         21.6   "   (k)      4.50-6.50
  Carpenter                          21.6   "   (k)      2.50-4.00
  Stone-mason                        21.6   "   (k)      3.70-4.90
  Painter                            32.4   "   (k)      2.75-4.00
  Blacksmith                         21.6   "   (k)      2.15-3.20
  Ship-builder                       21-26  "   (k)      2.15-3.50

We are not so much concerned in knowing the prices of meat, fish, eggs,
and flour in 301 and 1911 A.D. as we are in finding out whether the Roman
or the American workman could buy more of these commodities with the
returns for his labor. A starting point for such an estimate is furnished
by the Eighteenth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, on the "Cost
of Living and Retail Prices of Food" (1903), and by Bulletin No. 77 of the
Bureau of Labor (1908). In the first of these documents (pp. 582, 583) the
expenditure for rent, fuel, food, and other necessities of life in 11,156
normal American families whose incomes range from $200 to $1,200 per year
is given. In the other report (p. 344 _f._) similar statistics are given
for 1,944 English urban families. In the first case the average amount
spent per year was $617, of which $266, or a little less than a half of
the entire income, was used in the purchase of food. The statistics for
England show a somewhat larger relative amount spent for food. Almost
exactly one-third of this expenditure for the normal American family was
for meat and fish.[94] Now, if we take the wages of the Roman carpenter,
for instance, as 21 cents per day, and add one-fourth or one-third for his
"keep," those of the same American workman as $2.50 to $4.00, it is clear
that the former received only a ninth or a fifteenth as much as the
latter, while the average price of pork, beef, mutton, and ham (7.3 cents)
in 301 A.D. was about a third of the average (19.6 cents) of the same
articles to-day. The relative averages of wheat, rye, and barley make a
still worse showing for ancient times while fresh fish was nearly as high
in Diocletian's time as it is in our own day. The ancient and modern
prices of butter and eggs stand at the ratio of one to three and one to
six respectively. For the urban workman, then, in the fourth century,
conditions of life must have been almost intolerable, and it is hard to
understand how he managed to keep soul and body together, when almost all
the nutritious articles of food were beyond his means. The taste of meat,
fish, butter, and eggs must have been almost unknown to him, and probably
even the coarse bread and vegetables on which he lived were limited in
amount. The peasant proprietor who could raise his own cattle and grain
would not find the burden so hard to bear.

Only one question remains for us to answer. Did Diocletian succeed in his
bold attempt to reduce the cost of living? Fortunately the answer is given
us by Lactantius in the book which he wrote in 313-314 A.D., "On the
Deaths of Those Who Persecuted (the Christians)." The title of
Lactantius's work would not lead us to expect a very sympathetic treatment
of Diocletian, the arch-persecutor, but his account of the actual outcome
of the incident is hardly open to question. In Chapter VII of his
treatise, after setting forth the iniquities of the Emperor in constantly
imposing new burdens on the people, he writes: "And when he had brought on
a state of exceeding high prices by his different acts of injustice, he
tried to fix by law the prices of articles offered for sale. Thereupon,
for the veriest trifles much blood was shed, and out of fear nothing was
offered for sale, and the scarcity grew much worse, until, after the death
of many persons, the law was repealed from mere necessity." Thus came to
an end this early effort to reduce the high cost of living. Sixty years
later the Emperor Julian made a similar attempt on a small scale. He fixed
the price of corn for the people of Antioch by an edict. The holders of
grain hoarded their stock. The Emperor brought supplies of it into the
city from Egypt and elsewhere and sold it at the legal price. It was
bought up by speculators, and in the end Julian, like Diocletian, had to
acknowledge his inability to cope with an economic law.




Private Benefactions and Their Effect on the Municipal Life of the Romans


In the early days the authority of the Roman father over his wife, his
sons, and his daughters was absolute. He did what seemed to him good for
his children. His oversight and care extended to all the affairs of their
lives. The state was modelled on the family and took over the autocratic
power of the paterfamilias. It is natural to think of it, therefore, as a
paternal government, and the readiness with which the Roman subordinated
his own will and sacrificed his personal interests to those of the
community seems to show his acceptance of this theory of his relation to
the government. But this conception is correct in part only. A paternal
government seeks to foster all the common interests of its people and to
provide for their common needs. This the Roman state did not try to do,
and if we think of it as a paternal government, in the ordinary meaning
of that term, we lose sight of the partnership between state supervision
and individual enterprise in ministering to the common needs and desires,
which was one of the marked features of Roman life. In fact, the
gratification of the individual citizen's desire for those things which he
could not secure for himself depended in the Roman Empire, as it depends
in this country, not solely on state support, but in part on state aid,
and in part on private generosity. We see the truth of this very clearly
in studying the history of the Roman city. The phase of Roman life which
we have just noted may not fit into the ideas of Roman society which we
have hitherto held, but we can understand it as no other people can,
because in the United States and in England we are accustomed to the
co-operation of private initiative and state action in the establishment
and maintenance of universities, libraries, museums, and all sorts of
charitable institutions.

If we look at the growth of private munificence under the Republic, we
shall see that citizens showed their generosity particularly in the
construction of public buildings, partly or entirely at their own
expense. In this way some of the basilicas in Rome and elsewhere which
served as courts of justice and halls of exchange were constructed. The
great Basilica Æmilia, for instance, whose remains may be seen in the
Forum to-day, was constructed by an Æmilius in the second century before
our era, and was accepted as a charge by his descendants to be kept in
condition and improved at the expense of the Æmilian family. Under
somewhat similar conditions Pompey built the great theatre which bore his
name, the first permanent theatre to be built in Rome, and always
considered one of the wonders of the city. The cost of this structure was
probably covered by the treasure which he brought back from his campaigns
in the East. In using the spoils of a successful war to construct
buildings or memorials in Rome, he was following the example of Mummius,
the conqueror of Corinth, and other great generals who had preceded him.
The purely philanthropic motive does not bulk largely in these gifts to
the citizens, because the people whose armies had won the victories were
part owners at least of the spoils, and because the victorious leader who
built the structure was actuated more by the hope of transmitting the
memory of his achievements to posterity in some conspicuous and
imperishable monument than by a desire to benefit his fellow citizens.

These two motives, the one egoistic and the other altruistic, actuated all
the Roman emperors in varying degrees. The activity of Augustus in such
matters comes out clearly in the record of his reign, which he has left us
in his own words. This remarkable bit of autobiography, known as the
"Deeds of the Deified Augustus," the Emperor had engraved on bronze
tablets, placed in front of his mausoleum. The original has disappeared,
but fortunately a copy of it has been found on the walls of a ruined
temple at Ancyra, in Asia Minor, and furnishes us abundant proof of the
great improvements which he made in the city of Rome. We are told in it
that from booty he paid for the construction of the Forum of Augustus,
which was some four hundred feet long, three hundred wide, and was
surrounded by a wall one hundred and twenty feet high, covered on the
inside with marble and stucco. Enclosed within it and built with funds
coming from the same source was the magnificent temple of Mars the
Avenger, which had as its principal trophies the Roman standards recovered
from the Parthians. This forum and temple are only two items in the long
list of public improvements which Augustus records in his imperial
epitaph, for, as he proudly writes: "In my sixth consulship, acting under
a decree of the senate, I restored eighty-two temples in the city,
neglecting no temple which needed repair at the time." Besides the
temples, he mentions a large number of theatres, porticos, basilicas,
aqueducts, roads, and bridges which he built in Rome or in Italy outside
the city.

But the Roman people had come to look for acts of generosity from their
political as well as from their military leaders, and this factor, too,
must be taken into account in the case of Augustus. In the closing years
of the Republic, candidates for office and men elected to office saw that
one of the most effective ways of winning and holding their popularity was
to give public entertainments, and they vied with one another in the
costliness of the games and pageants which they gave the people. The
well-known case of Cæsar will be recalled, who, during his term as ædile,
or commissioner of public works, bankrupted himself by his lavish
expenditures on public improvements, and on the games, in which he
introduced three hundred and twenty pairs of gladiators for the amusement
of the people. In his book, "On the Offices," Cicero tells us of a thrifty
rich man, named Mamercus, who aspired to public office, but avoided taking
the ædileship, which stood in the regular sequence of minor offices, in
order that he might escape the heavy outlay for public entertainment
expected of the ædile. As a consequence, when later he came up for the
consulship, the people punished him by defeating him at the polls. To
check the growth of these methods of securing votes, Cicero, in his
consulship, brought in a corrupt practices act, which forbade citizens to
give gladiatorial exhibitions within two years of any election in which
they were candidates. We may doubt if this measure was effective. The
Roman was as clever as the American politician in accomplishing his
purpose without going outside the law. Perhaps an incident in the life of
Cicero's young friend, Curio, is a case in point. It was an old Roman
custom to celebrate the ninth day after a burial as a solemn family
festival, and some time in the second century before our era the practice
grew up of giving gladiatorial contests on these occasions. The versatile
Curio, following this practice, testified his respect for his father's
memory by giving the people such elaborate games that he never escaped
from the financial difficulties in which they involved him. However, this
tribute of pious affection greatly enhanced his popularity, and perhaps
did not expose him to the rigors of Cicero's law.

These gifts from generals, from distinguished citizens, and from
candidates for office do not go far to prove a generous or philanthropic
spirit on the part of the donors, but they show clearly enough that the
practice of giving large sums of money to embellish the city, and to
please the public, had grown up under the Republic, and that the people of
Rome had come to regard it as the duty of their distinguished fellow
citizens to beautify the city and minister to their needs and pleasures by
generous private contributions.

All these gifts were for the city of Rome, and for the people of the city,
not for the Empire, nor for Italy. This is characteristic of ancient
generosity or philanthropy, that its recipients are commonly the people
of a single town, usually the donor's native town. It is one of many
indications of the fact that the Roman thought of his city as the state,
and even under the Empire he rarely extended the scope of his benefactions
beyond the walls of a particular town. The small cities and villages
throughout the West reproduced the capital in miniature. Each was a little
world in itself. Each of them not only had its forum, its temples,
colonnades, baths, theatres, and arenas, but also developed a political
and social organization like that of the city of Rome. It had its own
local chief magistrates, distinguished by their official robes and
insignia of office, and its senators, who enjoyed the privilege of
occupying special seats in the theatre, and it was natural that the common
people at Ostia, Ariminum, or Lugudunum, like those at Rome, should expect
from those whom fortune had favored some return for the distinctions which
they enjoyed. In this way the prosperous in each little town came to feel
a sense of obligation to their native place, and this feeling of civic
pride and responsibility was strengthened by the same spirit of rivalry
between different villages that the Italian towns of the Middle Ages seem
to have inherited from their ancestors, a spirit of rivalry which made
each one eager to surpass the others in its beauty and attractiveness.
Perhaps there have never been so many beautiful towns in any other period
in history as there were in the Roman Empire, during the second century of
our era, and their attractive features--their colonnades, temples,
fountains, and works of art--were due in large measure to the generosity
of private citizens. We can make this statement with considerable
confidence, because these benefactions are recorded for us on innumerable
tablets of stone and bronze, scattered throughout the Empire.

These contributions not only helped to meet the cost of building temples,
colonnades, and other structures, but they were often intended to cover a
part of the running expenses of the city. This is one of the novel
features of Roman municipal life. We can understand the motives which
would lead a citizen of New York or Boston to build a museum or an arch in
his native city. Such a structure would serve as a monument to him; it
would give distinction to the city, and it would give him and his fellow
citizens æsthetic satisfaction tion But if a rich New Yorker should give
a large sum to mend the pavement in Union Square or extend the sewer
system on Canal Street, a judicial inquiry into his sanity would not be
thought out of place. But the inscriptions show us that rich citizens
throughout the Roman Empire frequently made large contributions for just
such unromantic purposes. It is unfortunate that a record of the annual
income and expenses of some Italian or Gallic town has not come down to
us. It would be interesting, for instance, to compare the budget of Mantua
or Ancona, in the first century of our era, with that of Princeton or
Cambridge in the twentieth. But, although we rarely know the sums which
were expended for particular purposes, a mere comparison of the objects
for which they were spent is illuminating. The items in the ancient budget
which find no place in our own, and vice versa, are significant of certain
striking differences between ancient and modern municipal life.

Common to the ancient and the modern city are expenditures for the
construction and maintenance of public buildings, sewers, aqueducts, and
streets, but with these items the parallelism ends. The ancient objects
of expenditure which find no place in the budget of an American town are
the repair of the town walls, the maintenance of public worship, the
support of the baths, the sale of grain at a low price, and the giving of
games and theatrical performances. It is very clear that the ancient
legislator made certain provisions for the physical and spiritual welfare
of his fellow citizens which find little or no place in our municipal
arrangements to-day. If, among the sums spent for the various objects
mentioned above, we compare the amounts set apart for religion and for the
baths, we may come to the conclusion that the Roman read the old saying,
"Cleanliness is next to godliness" in the amended form "Cleanliness is
next above godliness." No city in the Empire seems to have been too small
or too poor to possess public baths, and how large an item of annual
expense their care was is clear from the fact that an article of the
Theodosian code provided that cities should spend at least one-third of
their incomes on the heating of the baths and the repair of the walls. The
great idle population of the city of Rome had to be provided with food at
public expense. Otherwise riot and disorder would have followed, but in
the towns the situation was not so threatening, and probably furnishing
grain to the people did not constitute a regular item of expense. So far
as public entertainments were concerned, the remains of theatres and
amphitheatres in Pompeii, Fiesole, Aries, Orange, and at many other places
to-day furnish us visible evidence of the large sums which ancient towns
must have spent on plays and gladiatorial games. In the city of Rome in
the fourth century, there were one hundred and seventy-five days on which
performances were given in the theatres, arenas, and amphitheatres.

We have been looking at the items which were peculiar to the ancient
budget. Those which are missing from it are still more indicative, if
possible, of differences between Roman character and modes of life and
those of to-day. Provision was rarely made for schools, museums,
libraries, hospitals, almshouses, or for the lighting of streets. No
salaries were paid to city officials; no expenditure was made for police
or for protection against fire, and the slaves whom every town owned
probably took care of the public buildings and kept the streets clean.
The failure of the ancient city government to provide for educational and
charitable institutions, means, as we shall see later, that in some cases
these matters were neglected, that in others they were left to private
enterprise. It appears strange that the admirable police and fire system
which Augustus introduced into Rome was not adopted throughout the Empire,
but that does not seem to have been the case, and life and property must
have been exposed to great risks, especially on festival days and in the
unlighted streets at night. The rich man could be protected by his
bodyguard of clients, and have his way lighted at night by the torches
which his slaves carried, but the little shopkeeper must have avoided the
dark alleys or attached himself to the retinue of some powerful man. Some
of us will recall in this connection the famous wall painting at Pompeii
which depicts the riotous contest between the Pompeians and the people of
the neighboring town of Nuceria, at the Pompeian gladiatorial games in 50
B.C., when stones were thrown and weapons freely used. What scenes of
violence and disorder there must have been on such occasions as these,
without systematic police surveillance, can be readily imagined.

The sums of money which an ancient or a modern city spends fall in two
categories--the amounts which are paid out for permanent improvements, and
the running expenses of the municipality. We have just been looking at the
second class of expenditures, and our brief examination of it shows
clearly enough that the ancient city took upon its shoulders only a small
part of the burden which a modern municipality assumes. It will be
interesting now to see how far the municipal outlay for running expenses
was supplemented by private generosity, and to find out the extent to
which the cities were indebted to the same source for their permanent
improvements. A great deal of light is thrown on these two questions by
the hundreds of stone and bronze tablets which were set up by donors
themselves or by grateful cities to commemorate the gifts made to them.
The responsibility which the rich Roman felt to spend his money for the
public good was unequivocally stated by the poet Martial in one of his
epigrams toward the close of the first century of our era. The speaker in
the poem tells his friend Pastor why he is striving to be rich--not that
he may have broad estates, rich appointments, fine wines, or troops of
slaves, but "that he may give and build for the public good" ("ut donem,
Pastor, et ædificem"), and this feeling of stewardship found expression in
a steady outpouring of gifts in the interests of the people.

The practice of giving may well have started with the town officials. We
have already noticed that in Rome, under the Republic, candidates for
office, in seeking votes, and magistrates, in return for the honors paid
them, not infrequently spent large sums on the people. In course of time,
in the towns throughout the Empire this voluntary practice became a legal
obligation resting on local officials. This fact is brought out in the
municipal charter of Urso,[95] the modern Osuna, in Spain. Half of this
document, engraved on tablets, was discovered in Spain about forty years
ago, and makes a very interesting contribution to our knowledge of
municipal life. A colony was sent out to Urso, in 44 B.C., by Julius
Cæsar, under the care of Mark Antony, and the municipal constitution of
the colony was drawn up by one of these two men. In the seventieth
article, we read of the duumvirs, who were the chief magistrates: "Whoever
shall be duumvirs, with the exception of those who shall have first been
elected after the passage of this law, let the aforesaid during their
magistracy give a public entertainment or plays in honor of the gods and
goddesses Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, for four days, during the greater
part of the day, so far as it may be done, at the discretion of the common
councillors, and on these games and this entertainment let each one of
them spend from his own money not less than two thousand sesterces." The
article which follows in the document provides that the ædiles, or the
officials next in rank, shall give gladiatorial games and plays for three
days, and one day of races in the circus, and for these entertainments
they also must spend not less than two thousand sesterces.

Here we see the modern practice reversed. City officials, instead of
receiving a salary for their services, not only serve without pay, but are
actually required by law to make a public contribution. It will be noticed
that the law specified the minimum sum which a magistrate _must_ spend.
The people put no limit on what he _might_ spend, and probably most of the
duumvirs of Urso gave more than $80, or, making allowance for the
difference in the purchasing value of money, $250, for the entertainment
of the people. In fact a great many honorary inscriptions from other towns
tell us of officials who made generous additions to the sum required by
law. So far as their purpose and results go, these expenditures may be
compared with the "campaign contributions" made by candidates for office
in this country. There is a strange likeness and unlikeness between the
two. The modern politician makes his contribution before the election, the
ancient politician after it. In our day the money is expended largely to
provide for public meetings where the questions of the day shall be
discussed. In Roman times it was spent upon public improvements, and upon
plays, dinners, and gladiatorial games. Among us public sentiment is
averse to the expenditure of large sums to secure an election. The Romans
desired and expected it, and those who were open-handed in this matter
took care to have a record of their gifts set down where it could be read
by all men.

On general grounds we should expect our system to have a better effect on
the intelligence and character of the people, and to secure better
officials. The discussion of public questions, even in a partisan way,
brings them to the attention of the people, sets the people thinking, and
helps to educate voters on political and economic matters. If we may draw
an inference from the election posters in Pompeii, such subjects played a
small part in a city election under the Empire. It must have been
demoralizing, too, to a Pompeian or a citizen of Salona to vote for a
candidate, not because he would make the most honest and able duumvir or
ædile among the men canvassing for the office, but because he had the
longest purse. How our sense of propriety would be shocked if the newly
elected mayor of Hartford or Montclair should give a gala performance in
the local theatre to his fellow-citizens or pay for a free exhibition by a
circus troupe! But perhaps we should overcome our scruples and go, as the
people of Pompeii did, and perhaps our consciences would be completely
salved if the aforesaid mayor proceeded to lay a new pavement in Main
Street, to erect a fountain on the Green, or stucco the city hall.
Naturally only rich men could be elected to office in Roman towns, and in
this respect the same advantages and disadvantages attach to the Roman
system as we find in the practice which the English have followed up to
the present time of paying no salary to members of the House of Commons,
and in our own practice of letting our ambassadors meet a large part of
their legitimate expenses.

The large gifts made to their native towns by rich men elected to public
office set an example which private citizens of means followed in an
extraordinary way. Sometimes they gave statues, or baths, or fountains, or
porticos, and sometimes they provided for games, or plays, or dinners, or
lottery tickets. Perhaps nothing can convey to our minds so clear an
impression of the motives of the donors, the variety and number of the
gifts, and their probable effect on the character of the people as to read
two or three specimens of these dedicatory inscriptions. The citizens of
Lanuvium, near Rome, set up a monument in honor of a certain Valerius,
"because he cleaned out and restored the water courses for a distance of
three miles, put the pipes in position again, and restored the two baths
for men and the bath for women, all at his own expense."[96] A citizen of
Sinuessa leaves this record: "Lucius Papius Pollio, the duumvir, to his
father, Lucius Papius. Cakes and mead to all the citizens of Sinuessa and
Cædici; gladiatorial games and a dinner for the people of Sinuessa and the
Papian clan; a monument at a cost of 12,000 sesterces."[97] Such a
catholic provision to suit all tastes should certainly have served to keep
his father from being forgotten. A citizen of Beneventum lays claim to
distinction because "he first scattered tickets among the people by means
of which he distributed gold, silver, bronze, linen garments, and other
things."[98] The people of Telesia, a little town in Campania, pay this
tribute to their distinguished patron: "To Titus Fabius Severus, patron of
the town, for his services at home and abroad, and because he, first of
all those who have instituted games, gave at his own expense five wild
beasts from Africa, a company of gladiators, and a splendid equipment,
the senate and citizens have most gladly granted a statue."[99] The office
of patron was a characteristic Roman institution. Cities and villages
elected to this position some distinguished Roman senator or knight, and
he looked out for the interests of the community in legal matters and
otherwise.

This distinction was held in high esteem, and recipients of it often
testified their appreciation by generous gifts to the town which they
represented, or were chosen patrons because of their benefactions. This
fact is illustrated in the following inscription from Spoletium: "Gaius
Torasius Severus, the son of Gaius, of the Horatian tribe, quattuorvir
with judicial power, augur, in his own name, and in the name of his son
Publius Meclonius Proculus Torasianus, the pontiff, erected (this) on his
land (?) and at his own expense. He also gave the people 250,000 sesterces
to celebrate his son's birthday, from the income of which each year, on
the third day before the Kalends of September, the members of the Common
Council are to dine in public, and each citizen who is present is to
receive eight _asses_. He also gave to the seviri Augustales, and to the
priests of the Lares, and to the overseers of the city wards, 120,000
sesterces, in order that from the income of this sum they might have a
public dinner on the same day. Him, for his services to the community, the
senate has chosen patron of the town."[100] A town commonly showed its
appreciation of what had been done for it by setting up a statue in honor
of its benefactor, as was done in the case of Fabius Severus, and the
public squares of Italian and provincial towns must have been adorned with
many works of art of this sort. It amuses one to find at the bottom of
some of the commemorative tablets attached to these statues, the statement
that the man distinguished in this way, "contented with the honor, has
himself defrayed the cost of the monument." To pay for a popular
testimonial to one's generosity is indeed generosity in its perfect form.
The statues themselves have disappeared along with the towns which erected
them, but the tablets remain, and by a strange dispensation of fate the
monument which a town has set up to perpetuate the memory of one of its
citizens is sometimes the only record we have of the town's own existence.

The motives which actuated the giver were of a mixed character, as these
memorials indicate. Sometimes it was desire for the applause of his fellow
citizens, or for posthumous fame, which influenced a donor; sometimes
civic pride and affection. In many cases it was the compelling force of
custom, backed up now and then, as we can see from the inscriptions, by
the urgent demands of the populace. Out of this last sentiment there would
naturally grow a sense of the obligation imposed by the possession of
wealth, and this feeling is closely allied to pure generosity. In fact, it
would probably be wrong not to count this among the original motives which
actuated men in making their gifts, because the spirit of devotion to the
state and to the community was a marked characteristic of Romans in the
republican period.

The effects which this practice of giving had on municipal life and on the
character of the people are not without importance and interest. The
lavish expenditure expected of a magistrate and the ever-increasing
financial obligations laid upon him by the central government made
municipal offices such an intolerable burden that the charter of Urso of
the first century A.D., which has been mentioned above, has to resort to
various ingenious devices to compel men to hold them. The position of a
member of a town council was still worse. He was not only expected to
contribute generously to the embellishment and support of his native city,
but he was also held responsible for the collection of the imperial taxes.
As prosperity declined he found this an increasingly difficult thing to
do, and seats in the local senate were undesirable. The central government
could not allow the men responsible for its revenues to escape their
responsibility. Consequently, it interposed and forced them to accept the
honor. Some of them enlisted in the army, or even fled into the desert,
but whenever they were found they were brought back to take up their
positions again. In the fourth century, service in the common council was
even made a penalty imposed upon criminals. Finally, it became hereditary,
and it is an amusing but pathetic thing to find that this honor, so highly
prized in the early period, became in the end a form of serfdom.

We have been looking at the effects of private generosity on official
life. Its results for the private citizen are not so clear, but it must
have contributed to that decline of independence and of personal
responsibility which is so marked a feature of the later Empire. The
masses contributed little, if anything, to the running expenses of
government and the improvement of the city. The burdens fell largely upon
the rich. It was a system of quasi-socialism. Those who had, provided for
those who had not--not merely markets and temples, and colonnades, and
baths, but oil for the baths, games, plays, and gratuities of money. Since
their needs were largely met by others, the people lost more and more the
habit of providing for themselves and the ability to do so. When
prosperity declined, and the wealthy could no more assist them, the end
came.

The objects for which donors gave their money seem to prove the
essentially materialistic character of Roman civilization, because we must
assume that those who gave knew the tastes of the people. Sometimes men
like Pliny the Younger gave money for libraries or schools, but such gifts
seem to have been relatively infrequent. Benefactions are commonly
intended to satisfy the material needs or gratify the desire of the
people for pleasure.

Under the old régime charity was unknown. There were neither almshouses
nor hospitals, and scholars have called attention to the fact that even
the doles of corn which the state gave were granted to citizens only. Mere
residents or strangers were left altogether out of consideration, and they
were rarely included within the scope of private benevolence. In the
following chapter, in discussing the trades-guilds, we shall see that even
they made no provision for the widow or orphan, or for their sick or
disabled members. It was not until Christianity came that the poor and the
needy were helped because of their poverty and need.




Some Reflections on Corporations and Trades-Guilds


In a recent paper on "Ancient and Modern Imperialism," read before the
British Classical Association, Lord Cromer, England's late consul-general
in Egypt, notes certain points of resemblance between the English and the
Roman methods of dealing with alien peoples. With the Greeks no such
points of contact exist, because, as he remarks, "not only was the
imperial idea foreign to the Greek mind; the federal conception was
equally strange." This similarity between the political character and
methods of the Romans and Anglo-Saxons strikes any one who reads the
history of the two peoples side by side. They show the same genius for
government at home, and a like success in conquering and holding foreign
lands, and in assimilating alien peoples. Certain qualities which they
have in common contribute to these like results. Both the Roman and the
Anglo-Saxon have been men of affairs; both have shown great skill in
adapting means to an end, and each has driven straight at the immediate
object to be accomplished without paying much heed to logic or political
theory. A Roman statesman would have said "Amen!" to the Englishman's
pious hope that "his countrymen might never become consistent or logical
in politics." Perhaps the willingness of the average Roman to co-operate
with his fellows, and his skill in forming an organization suitable for
the purpose in hand, go farther than any of the other qualities mentioned
above to account for his success in governing other peoples as well as his
own nation.

Our recognition of these striking points of resemblance between the Romans
and ourselves has come from a comparative study of the political life of
the two peoples. But the likeness to each other of the Romans and
Anglo-Saxons, especially in the matter of associating themselves together
for a common object, is still more apparent in their methods of dealing
with private affairs. A characteristic and amusing illustration of the
working of this tendency among the Romans is furnished by the early
history of monasticism in the Roman world. When the Oriental Christian
had convinced himself of the vanity of the world, he said: "It is the
weakness of the flesh and the enticements of the wicked which tempt me to
sin. Therefore I will withdraw from the world and mortify the flesh." This
is the spirit which drove him into the desert or the mountains, to live in
a cave with a lion or a wolf for his sole companion. This is the spirit
which took St. Anthony into a solitary place in Egypt. It led St. Simeon
Stylites to secure a more perfect sense of aloofness from the world, and a
greater security from contact with it by spending the last thirty years of
his life on the top of a pillar near Antioch. In the Western world, which
was thoroughly imbued with the Roman spirit, the Christian who held the
same view as his Eastern brother of the evil results flowing from
intercourse with his fellow men, also withdrew from the world, but he
withdrew in the company of a group of men who shared his opinions on the
efficacy of a life of solitude. A delightful instance of the triumph of
the principle of association over logic or theory! We Americans can
understand perfectly the compelling force of the principle, even in such a
case as this, and we should justify the Roman's action on the score of
practical common sense. We have organizations for almost every conceivable
political, social, literary, and economic purpose. In fact, it would be
hard to mention an object for which it would not be possible to organize a
club, a society, a league, a guild, or a union. In a similar way the
Romans had organizations of capitalists and laborers, religious
associations, political and social clubs, and leagues of veterans.

So far as organizations of capitalists are concerned, their history is
closely bound up with that of imperialism. They come to our notice for the
first time during the wars with Carthage, when Rome made her earliest
acquisitions outside of Italy. In his account of the campaigns in Spain
against Hannibal's lieutenants, Livy tells us[101] of the great straits to
which the Roman army was reduced for its pay, food, and clothing. The need
was urgent, but the treasury was empty, and the people poverty-stricken.
In this emergency the prætor called a public meeting, laid before it the
situation in Spain, and, appealing to the joint-stock companies to come to
the relief of the state, appointed a day when proposals could be made to
furnish what was required by the army. On the appointed day three
_societates_, or corporations, offered to make the necessary loans to the
government; their offers were accepted, and the needs of the army were
met. The transaction reminds us of similar emergencies in our civil war,
when syndicates of bankers came to the support of the government. The
present-day tendency to question the motives of all corporations dealing
with the government does not seem to color Livy's interpretation of the
incident, for he cites it in proof of the patriotic spirit which ran
through all classes in the face of the struggle with Carthage. The
appearance of the joint-stock company at the moment when the policy of
territorial expansion is coming to the front is significant of the close
connection which existed later between imperialism and corporate finance,
but the later relations of corporations to the public interests cannot
always be interpreted in so charitable a fashion.

Our public-service companies find no counter-part in antiquity, but the
Roman societies for the collection of taxes bear a resemblance to these
modern organizations of capital in the nature of the franchises, as we
may call them, and the special privileges which they had. The practice
which the Roman government followed of letting out to the highest bidder
the privilege of collecting the taxes in each of the provinces, naturally
gave a great impetus to the development of companies organized for this
purpose. Every new province added to the Empire opened a fresh field for
capitalistic enterprise, in the way not only of farming the taxes, but
also of loaning money, constructing public works, and leasing the mines
belonging to the state, and Roman politicians must have felt these
financial considerations steadily pushing them on to further conquests.

But the interest of the companies did not end when Roman eagles had been
planted in a new region. It was necessary to have the provincial
government so managed as to help the agents of the companies in making as
much money as possible out of the provincials, and Cicero's year as
governor of Cilicia was made almost intolerable by the exactions which
these agents practised on the Cilicians, and the pressure which they
brought to bear upon him and his subordinates. His letters to his intimate
friend, Atticus, during this period contain pathetic accounts of the
embarrassing situations in which loaning companies and individual
capitalists at Rome placed him. On one occasion a certain Scaptius came to
him[102], armed with a strong letter of recommendation from the impeccable
Brutus, and asked to be appointed prefect of Cyprus. His purpose was, by
official pressure, to squeeze out of the people of Salamis, in Cyprus, a
debt which they owed, running at forty-eight per cent interest. Upon
making some inquiry into the previous history of Scaptius, Cicero learned
that under his predecessor in Cilicia, this same Scaptius had secured an
appointment as prefect of Cyprus, and backed by his official power, to
collect money due his company, had shut up the members of the Salaminian
common council in their town hall until five of them died of starvation.
In domestic politics the companies played an equally important rôle. The
relations which existed between the "interests" and political leaders were
as close in ancient times as they are to-day, and corporations were as
unpartisan in Rome in their political alliances as they are in the United
States. They impartially supported the democratic platforms of Gaius
Gracchus and Julius Cæsar in return for valuable concessions, and backed
the candidacy of the constitutionalist Pompey for the position of
commander-in-chief of the fleets and armies acting against the Eastern
pirates, and against Mithridates, in like expectation of substantial
returns for their help. What gave the companies their influence at the
polls was the fact that their shares were very widely held by voters.
Polybius, the Greek historian, writing of conditions at Rome in the second
century B.C., gives us to understand that almost every citizen owned
shares in some joint-stock company[103]. Poor crops in Sicily, heavy rains
in Sardinia, an uprising in Gaul, or "a strike" in the Spanish mines would
touch the pocket of every middle-class Roman.

In these circumstances it is hard to see how the Roman got on without
stock quotations in the newspapers. But Cæsar's publication of the _Acta
Diurna_, or proceedings of the senate and assembly, would take the place
of our newspapers in some respects, and the crowds which gathered at the
points where these documents were posted, would remind us of the throngs
collected in front of the bulletin in the window of a newspaper office
when some exciting event has occurred. Couriers were constantly arriving
from the agents of corporations in Gaul, Spain, Africa, and Asia with the
latest news of industrial and financial enterprises in all these sections.
What a scurrying of feet there must have been through the streets when the
first news reached Rome of the insurrection of the proletariat in Asia in
88 B.C., and of the proclamation of Mithridates guaranteeing release from
half of their obligations to all debtors who should kill money-lenders!
Asiatic stocks must have dropped almost to the zero point. We find no
evidence of the existence of an organized stock exchange. Perhaps none was
necessary, because the shares of stock do not seem to have been
transferable, but other financial business arising out of the organization
of these companies, like the loaning of money on stock, could be
transacted reasonably well in the row of banking offices which ran along
one side of the Forum, and made it an ancient Wall Street or Lombard
Street.

"Trusts" founded to control prices troubled the Romans, as they trouble
us to-day. There is an amusing reference to one of these trade
combinations as early as the third century before our era in the Captives
of Plautus.[104] The parasite in the play has been using his best quips
and his most effective leads to get an invitation to dinner, but he can't
provoke a smile, to say nothing of extracting an invitation. In a high
state of indignation he threatens to prosecute the men who avoid being his
hosts for entering into an unlawful combination like that of "the oil
dealers in the Velabrum." Incidentally it is a rather interesting
historical coincidence that the pioneer monopoly in Rome, as in our day,
was an oil trust--in the time of Plautus, of course, an olive-oil trust.
In the "Trickster," which was presented in 191 B.C., a character refers to
the mountains of grain which the dealers had in their warehouses.[105] Two
years later the "corner" had become so effective that the government
intervened, and the curule ædiles who had charge of the markets imposed a
heavy fine on the grain speculators.[106] The case was apparently
prosecuted under the Laws of the Twelve Tables of 450 B.C., the Magna
Charta of Roman liberty. It would seem, therefore, that combinations in
restraint of trade were formed at a very early date in Rome, and perhaps
Diocletian's attempt in the third century of our era to lower the cost of
living by fixing the prices of all sorts of commodities was aimed in part
at the same evil. As for government ownership, the Roman state made one or
two essays in this field, notably in the case of mines, but with
indifferent success.

Labor was as completely organized as capital.[107] In fact the passion of
the Romans for association shows itself even more clearly here, and it
would be possible to write their industrial history from a study of their
trades-unions. The story of Rome carries the founding of these guilds back
to the early days of the regal period. From the investigations of
Waltzing, Liebenam, and others their history can be made out in
considerable detail. Roman tradition was delightfully systematic in
assigning the founding of one set of institutions to one king and of
another group to another king. Romulus, for instance, is the war king, and
concerns himself with military and political institutions. The second
king, Numa, is a man of peace, and is occupied throughout his reign with
the social and religious organization of his people. It was Numa who
established guilds of carpenters, dyers, shoemakers, tanners, workers in
copper and gold, fluteplayers, and potters. The critical historian looks
with a sceptical eye on the story of the kings, and yet this list of
trades is just what we should expect to find in primitive Rome. There are
no bakers or weavers, for instance, in the list. We know that in our own
colonial days the baking, spinning, and weaving were done at home, as they
would naturally have been when Rome was a community of shepherds and
farmers. As Roman civilization became more complex, industrial
specialization developed, and the number of guilds grew, but during the
Republic we cannot trace their growth very successfully for lack of
information about them. Corporations, as we have seen, played an
important part in politics, and their doings are chronicled in the
literature, like oratory and history, which deals with public questions,
but the trades-guilds had little share in politics; they were made up of
the obscure and weak, and consequently are rarely mentioned in the
writings of a Cicero or a Livy.

It is only when the general passion for setting down records of all sorts
of enterprises and incidents on imperishable materials came in with the
Empire that the story of the Roman trades-union can be clearly followed.
It is a fortunate thing for us that this mania swept through the Roman
Empire, because it has given us some twenty-five hundred inscriptions
dealing with these organizations of workmen. These inscriptions disclose
the fact that there were more than eighty different trades organized into
guilds in the city of Rome alone. They included skilled and unskilled
laborers, from the porters, or _saccarii_, to the goldsmiths, or
_aurifices_. The names of some of them, like the _pastillarii_, or guild
of pastile-makers, and the _scabillarii_, or castanet-players, indicate a
high degree of industrial specialization. From one man's tombstone even
the conclusion seems to follow that he belonged to a union of what we may
perhaps call checker-board makers. The merchants formed trade associations
freely. Dealers in oil, in wine, in fish, and in grain are found organized
all over the Empire. Even the perfumers, hay-dealers, and ragmen had their
societies. No line of distinction seems to be drawn between the artist and
the artisan. The mason and the sculptor were classed in the same category
by Roman writers, so that we are not surprised to find unions of men in
both occupations. A curious distinction between the professions is also
brought out by these guild inscriptions. There are unions made up of
physicians, but none of lawyers, for the lawyer in early times was
supposed to receive no remuneration for his services. In point of fact the
physician was on a lower social plane in Rome than he was even among our
ancestors. The profession was followed almost exclusively by Greek
freedmen, as we can see from the records on their tombstones, and was
highly specialized, if we may judge from the epitaphs of eye and ear
doctors, surgeons, dentists, and veterinarians. To the same category with
the physician and sculptor belong the architect, the teacher, and the
chemist. Men of these professions pursued the _artes liberales_, as the
Romans put it, and constituted an aristocracy among those engaged in the
trades or lower professions. Below them in the hierarchy came those who
gained a livelihood by the _artes ludicræ_, like the actor, professional
dancer, juggler, or gladiator, and in the lowest caste were the
carpenters, weavers, and other artisans whose occupations were _artes
vulgares et sordidæ_.

In the early part of this chapter the tendency of the Romans to form
voluntary associations was noted as a national characteristic. This fact
comes out very clearly if we compare the number of trades-unions in the
Western world with those in Greece and the Orient. Our conclusions must be
drawn of course from the extant inscriptions which refer to guilds, and
time may have dealt more harshly with the stones in one place than in
another, or the Roman government may have given its consent to the
establishment of such organizations with more reluctance in one province
than another; but, taking into account the fact that we have guild
inscriptions from four hundred and seventy-five towns and villages in the
Empire, these elements of uncertainty in our conclusions are practically
eliminated, and a fair comparison may be drawn between conditions in the
East and the West. If we pick out some of the more important towns in the
Greek part of the Roman world, we find five guilds reported from Tralles
in Caria, six from Smyrna, one from Alexandria, and eleven from Hierapolis
in Phrygia. On the other hand, in the city of Rome there were more than
one hundred, in Brixia (modern Brescia) seventeen or more, in Lugudunum
(Lyons) twenty at least, and in Canabæ, in the province of Dacia, five.
These figures, taken at random for some of the larger towns in different
parts of the Empire, bring out the fact very clearly that the western and
northern provinces readily accepted Roman ideas and showed the Roman
spirit, as illustrated in their ability and willingness to co-operate for
a common purpose, but that the Greek East was never Romanized. Even in the
settlements in Dacia, which continued under Roman rule only from 107 to
270 A.D., we find as many trades-unions as existed in Greek towns which
were held by the Romans for three or four centuries. The comparative
number of guilds and of guild inscriptions would, in fact, furnish us
with a rough test of the extent to which Rome impressed her civilization
on different parts of the Empire, even if we had no other criteria. We
should know, for instance, that less progress had been made in Britain
than in Southern Gaul, that Salona in Dalmatia, Lugudunum in Gaul, and
Mogontiacum (Mainz) in Germany were important centres of Roman
civilization. It is, of course, possible from a study of these
inscriptions to make out the most flourishing industries in the several
towns, but with that we are not concerned here.

These guilds which we have been considering were trades-unions in the
sense that they were organizations made up of men working in the same
trade, but they differed from modern unions, and also from mediaeval
guilds, in the objects for which they were formed. They made no attempt to
raise wages, to improve working conditions, to limit the number of
apprentices, to develop skill and artistic taste in the craft, or to
better the social or political position of the laborer. It was the need
which their members felt for companionship, sympathy, and help in the
emergencies of life, and the desire to give more meaning to their lives,
that drew them together. These motives explain the provisions made for
social gatherings, and for the burial of members, which were the
characteristic features of most of the organizations. It is the social
side, for instance, which is indicated on a tombstone, found in a little
town of central Italy. After giving the name of the deceased, it reads:
"He bequeathed to his guild, the rag-dealers, a thousand sesterces, from
the income of which each year, on the festival of the Parentalia, not less
than twelve men shall dine at his tomb."[108] Another in northern Italy
reads: "To Publius Etereius Quadratus, the son of Publius, of the _Tribus
Quirina_, Etereia Aristolais, his mother, has set up a statue, at whose
dedication she gave the customary banquet to the union of rag-dealers, and
also a sum of money, from the income of which annually, from this time
forth, on the birthday of Quadratus, April 9, where his remains have been
laid, they should make a sacrifice, and should hold the customary banquet
in the temple, and should bring roses in their season and cover and crown
the statue; which thing they have undertaken to do."[109] The menu of one
of these dinners given in Dacia[110] has come down to us. It includes lamb
and pork, bread, salad, onions, and two kinds of wine. The cost of the
entertainment amounted to one hundred and sixty-nine _denarii_, or about
twenty-seven dollars, a sum which would probably have a purchasing value
to-day of from three to four times that amount.

The "temple" or chapel referred to in these inscriptions was usually
semicircular, and may have served as a model for the Christian oratories.
The building usually stood in a little grove, and, with its accommodations
for official meetings and dinners, served the same purpose as a modern
club-house. Besides the special gatherings for which some deceased member
or some rich patron provided, the guild met at fixed times during the year
to dine or for other social purposes. The income of the society, which was
made up of the initiation fees and monthly dues of the members, and of
donations, was supplemented now and then by a system of fines. At least,
in an African inscription we read: "In the Curia of Jove. Done November
27, in the consulship of Maternus and Atticus.... If any one shall wish to
be a flamen, he shall give three amphorae of wine, besides bread and salt
and provisions. If any one shall wish to be a magister, he shall give two
amphorae of wine.... If any one shall have spoken disrespectfully to a
flamen, or laid hands upon him, he shall pay two denarii.... If any one
shall have gone to fetch wine, and shall have made away with it, he shall
give double the amount."[111]

The provision which burial societies made for their members is illustrated
by the following epitaph:

"To the shade of Gaius Julius Filetio, born in Africa, a physician, who
lived thirty-five years. Gaius Julius Filetus and Julia Euthenia, his
parents, have erected it to their very dear son. Also to Julius
Athenodorus, his brother, who lived thirty-five years. Euthenia set it up.
He has been placed here, to whose burial the guild of rag-dealers has
contributed three hundred denarii."[112] People of all ages have craved a
respectable burial, and the pathetic picture which Horace gives us in one
of his Satires of the fate which befell the poor and friendless at the
end of life, may well have led men of that class to make provisions which
would protect them from such an experience, and it was not an unnatural
thing for these organizations to be made up of men working in the same
trade. The statutes of several guilds have come down to us. One found at
Lanuvium has articles dealing particularly with burial regulations. They
read in part:[113]

"It has pleased the members, that whoever shall wish to join this guild
shall pay an initiation fee of one hundred sesterces, and an amphora of
good wine, as well as five _asses_ a month. Voted likewise, that if any
man shall not have paid his dues for six consecutive months, and if the
lot common to all men has befallen him, his claim to a burial shall not be
considered, even if he shall have so stipulated in his will. Voted
likewise, that if any man from this body of ours, having paid his dues,
shall depart, there shall come to him from the treasury three hundred
sesterces, from which sum fifty sesterces, which shall be divided at the
funeral pyre, shall go for the funeral rites. Furthermore, the obsequies
shall be performed on foot."

Besides the need of comradeship, and the desire to provide for a
respectable burial, we can see another motive which brought the weak and
lowly together in these associations. They were oppressed by the sense of
their own insignificance in society, and by the pitifully small part which
they played in the affairs of the world. But if they could establish a
society of their own, with concerns peculiar to itself which they would
administer, and if they could create positions of honor and importance in
this organization, even the lowliest man in Rome would have a chance to
satisfy that craving to exercise power over others which all of us feel,
to hold titles and distinctions, and to wear the insignia of office and
rank. This motive worked itself out in the establishment of a complete
hierarchy of offices, as we saw in part in an African inscription given
above. The Roman state was reproduced in miniature in these societies,
with their popular assemblies, and their officials, who bore the honorable
titles of quæstor, curator, prætor, ædile, and so forth.

To read these twenty-five hundred or more inscriptions from all parts of
the Empire brings us close to the heart of the common people. We see
their little ambitions, their jealousies, their fears, their gratitude for
kindness, their own kindliness, and their loyalty to their fellows. All of
them are anxious to be remembered after death, and provide, when they can
do so, for the celebration of their birthdays by members of the
association. A guild inscription in Latium, for instance, reads:[114]
"Jan. 6, birthday of Publius Claudius Veratius Abascantianus, [who has
contributed] 6,000 sesterces, [paying an annual interest of] 180 denarii."
"Jan. 25, birthday of Gargilius Felix, [who has contributed] 2,000
sesterces, [paying an annual interest of] 60 denarii," and so on through
the twelve months of the year.

It is not entirely clear why the guilds never tried to bring pressure to
bear on their employers to raise wages, or to improve their position by
means of the strike, or by other methods with which we are familiar
to-day. Perhaps the difference between the ancient and modern methods of
manufacture helps us to understand this fact. In modern times most
articles can be made much more cheaply by machinery than by hand, and the
use of water-power, of steam, and of electricity, and the invention of
elaborate machines, has led us to bring together a great many workmen
under one roof or in one factory. The men who are thus employed in a
single establishment work under common conditions, suffer the same
disadvantages, and are brought into such close relations with one another
that common action to improve their lot is natural. In ancient times, as
may be seen in the chapter on Diocletian's edict, machinery was almost
unknown, and artisans worked singly in their own homes or in the houses of
their employers, so that joint action to improve their condition would
hardly be expected.

Another factor which should probably be taken into account is the
influence of slavery. This institution did not play the important rôle
under the Empire in depressing the free laborer which it is often supposed
to have played, because it was steadily dying out; but an employer could
always have recourse to slave labor to a limited extent, and the
struggling freedmen who had just come up from slavery were not likely to
urge very strongly their claims for consideration.

In this connection it is interesting to recall the fact that before
slavery got a foothold in Rome, the masses in their struggle with the
classes used what we think of to-day as the most modern weapon employed in
industrial warfare. We can all remember the intense interest with which we
watched the novel experience which St. Petersburg underwent some six years
ago, when the general strike was instituted. And yet, if we accept
tradition, that method of bringing the government and society to terms was
used twice by the Roman proletariat over two thousand years ago. The
plebeians, so the story goes, unable to get their economic and political
rights, stopped work and withdrew from the city to the Sacred Mount. Their
abstention from labor did not mean the going out of street lamps, the
suspension of street-car traffic, and the closing of factories and shops,
but, besides the loss of fighting men, it meant that no more shoes could
be had, no more carpentry work done, and no more wine-jars made until
concessions should be granted. But, having slaves to compete with it, and
with conditions which made organization difficult, free labor could not
hope to rise, and the unions could take no serious step toward the
improvement of the condition of their members. The feeling of security on
this score which society had, warranted the government in allowing even
its own employees to organize, and we find unions of government clerks,
messengers, and others. The Roman government was, therefore, never called
upon to solve the grave political and economic questions which France and
Italy have had to face in late years in the threatened strikes of the
state railway and postal employees.

We have just been noticing how the ancient differed from the modern
trades-union in the objects which it sought to obtain. The religious
character which it took seems equally strange to us at first sight. Every
guild put itself under the protection of some deity and was closely
associated with a cult. Silvanus, the god of the woods, was a natural
favorite with the carpenters, Father Bacchus with the innkeepers, Vesta
with the bakers, and Diana with those who hunted wild animals for the
circus. The reason for the choice of certain other divine patrons is not
so clear. Why the cabmen of Tibur, for instance, picked out Hercules as
their tutelary deity, unless, like Horace in his Satires, the ancient
cabman thought of him as the god of treasure-trove, and, therefore,
likely to inspire the giving of generous tips, we cannot guess. The
religious side of Roman trade associations will not surprise us when we
recall the strong religious bent of the Roman character, and when we
remember that no body of Romans would have thought of forming any kind of
an organization without securing the sanction and protection of the gods.
The family, the clan, the state all had their protecting deities, to whom
appropriate rites were paid on stated occasions. Speaking of the religious
side of these trade organizations naturally reminds one of the religious
associations which sprang up in such large numbers toward the end of the
republican period and under the Empire. They lie outside the scope of this
chapter, but, in the light of the issue which has arisen in recent years
between religious associations and the governments of Italy, France,
Spain, and Portugal, it is interesting to notice in passing that the Roman
state strove to hold in check many of the ancient religious associations,
but not always with much success. As we have noticed, its attitude toward
the trade-guilds was not unfriendly. In the last days of the Republic,
however, they began to enter politics, and were used very effectively in
the elections by political leaders in both parties.[115] In fact the
fortunes of the city seemed likely to be controlled by political clubs,
until severe legislation and the transfer of the elections in the early
Empire from the popular assemblies to the senate put an end to the use of
trade associations for political purposes. It was in the light of this
development that the government henceforth required all newly formed
trades-unions to secure official authorization.

The change in the attitude of the state toward these organizations, as
time went on, has been traced by Liebenam in his study of Roman
associations. The story of this change furnishes an interesting episode in
the history of special privilege, and may not be without profit to us. The
Roman government started with the assumption that the operation of these
voluntary associations was a matter of public as well as of private
concern, and could serve public interests. Therefore their members were to
be exempted from some of the burdens which the ordinary citizen bore. It
was this reasoning, for instance, which led Trajan to set the bakers free
from certain charges, and which influenced Hadrian to grant the same
favors to those associations of skippers which supplied Rome with food. In
the light of our present-day discussion it is interesting also to find
that Marcus Aurelius granted them the right to manumit slaves and receive
legacies--that is, he made them juridical persons. But if these
associations were to be fostered by law, in proportion as they promoted
the public welfare, it also followed logically that the state could put a
restraining hand upon them when their development failed to serve public
interests in the highest degree. Following this logical sequence, the
Emperor Claudius, in his efforts to promote a more wholesome home life, or
for some other reason not known to us, forbade the eating-houses or the
delicatessen shops to sell cooked meats or warm water. Antoninus Pius, in
his paternal care for the unions, prescribed an age test and a physical
test for those who wished to become members. Later, under the law a man
was allowed to join one guild only. Such a legal provision as this was a
natural concomitant of the concession of privileges to the unions. If the
members of these organizations were to receive special favors from the
state, the state must see to it that the rolls were not padded. It must,
in fact, have the right of final supervision of the list of members. So
long as industry flourished, and so long as the population increased, or
at least remained stationary, this oversight by the government brought no
appreciable ill results. But when financial conditions grew steadily
worse, when large tracts of land passed out of cultivation and the
population rapidly dwindled, the numbers in the trades-unions began to
decline. The public services, constantly growing heavier, which the state
required of the guilds in return for their privileges made the loss of
members still greater. This movement threatened the industrial interests
of the Empire and must be checked at all hazards. Consequently, taking
another logical step in the way of government regulation in the interests
of the public, the state forbade men to withdraw from the unions, and made
membership in a union hereditary. Henceforth the carpenter must always
remain a carpenter, the weaver a weaver, and the sons and grandsons of the
carpenter and the weaver must take up the occupation of their fathers, and
a man is bound forever to his trade as the serf is to the soil.




A Roman Politician

(Gaius Scribonius Curio)



The life of Gaius Scribonius Curio has so many points of interest for the
student of Roman politics and society, that one is bewildered by the
variety of situations and experiences which it covers. His private
character is made up of a _mélange_ of contradictory qualities, of
generosity, and profligacy, of sincerity and unscrupulousness. In his
public life there is the same facile change of guiding principles. He is
alternately a follower of Cicero and a supporter of his bitterest enemy, a
Tory and a Democrat, a recognized opponent of Cæsar and his trusted agent
and adviser. His dramatic career stirs Lucan to one of his finest
passages, gives a touch of vigor to the prosaic narrative of Velleius, and
even leads the sedate Pliny to drop into satire.[116] Friend and foe have
helped to paint the picture. Cicero, the counsellor of his youth, writes
of him and to him; Cælius, his bosom friend, analyzes his character;
Cæsar leaves us a record of his military campaigns and death, while
Velleius and Appian recount his public and private sins. His story has
this peculiar charm, that many of the incidents which make it up are
related from day to day, as they occurred, by his contemporaries, Cicero
and Cælius, in the confidential letters which they wrote to their intimate
friends. With all the strange elements which entered into it, however, his
career is not an unusual one for the time in which he lived. Indeed it is
almost typical for the class to which he belonged, and in studying it we
shall come to know something more of that group of brilliant young men,
made up of Cælius, Antony, Dolabella, and others, who were drawn to
Cæsar's cause and played so large a part in bringing him success. The life
of Curio not only illuminates social conditions in the first century
before our era, but it epitomizes and personifies the political history of
his time and the last struggles of the Republic. It brings within its
compass the Catilinarian conspiracy, the agitation of Clodius, the
formation of the first triumvirate, the rivalry of Cæsar and Pompey, and
the civil war, for in all these episodes Curio took an active part.

Students of history have called attention to the striking way in which the
members of certain distinguished Roman families from generation to
generation kept up the political traditions of the family. The Claudian
family is a striking case in point. Recognition of this fact helps us to
understand Curio. His grandfather and his father were both prominent
orators and politicians, as Cicero tells us in his Brutus.[117] The
grandfather reached the praetorship in the year in which Gaius Gracchus
was done to death by his political opponents, while Curio pater was
consul, in 76 B.C., when the confusion which followed the breaking up of
the constitution and of the party of Sulla was at its height. Cicero tells
us that the second Curio had "absolutely no knowledge of letters," but
that he was one of the successful public speakers of his day, thanks to
the training which he had received at home. The third Curio, with whom we
are concerned here, was prepared for public life as his father had been,
for Cicero remarks of him that "although he had not been sufficiently
trained by teachers, he had a rare gift for oratory."[118]

On this point Cicero could speak with authority, because Curio had very
possibly been one of his pupils in oratory and law. At least the very
intimate acquaintance which he has with Curio's character and the
incidents of his life, the fatherly tone of Cicero's letters to him, and
the fact that Curio's nearest friends were among his disciples make this a
natural inference. How intimate this relation was, one can see from the
charming picture which Cicero draws, in the introductory chapters of his
Essay on Friendship, of his own intercourse as a young man with the
learned Augur Scævola. Roman youth attended their counsellor and friend
when he went to the forum to take part in public business, or sat with him
at home discussing matters of public and private interest, as Cicero and
his companions sat on the bench in the garden with the pontiff Scævola,
when he set forth the discourse of Lælius on friendship, and thus, out of
his experience, the old man talked to the young men about him upon the
conduct of life as well as upon the technical points of law and oratory.
So many of the brilliant young politicians of this period had been brought
into close relations with Cicero in this way, that when he found himself
forced out of politics by the Cæsarians, he whimsically writes to his
friend Pætus that he is inclined to give up public life and open a school,
and not more than a year before his death he pathetically complains that
he has not leisure even to take the waters at the spa, because of the
demands which are made upon him for lessons in oratory.

If it did not take us too far from our chosen subject, it would be
interesting to stop and consider at length what effect Cicero's intimate
relations with these young men had upon his character, his political
views, his personal fortunes, and the course of politics. That they kept
him young in his interests and sympathies, that they kept his mind alert
and receptive, comes out clearly in his letters to them, which are full of
jest and raillery and enthusiasm. That he never developed into a Tory, as
Catulus did, or became indifferent to political conditions, as Lucullus
did, may have been due in part to his intimate association with this group
of enthusiastic young politicians. So far as his personal fortunes were
concerned, when the struggle between Cæsar and Pompey came, these former
pupils of Cicero had an opportunity to show their attachment and their
gratitude to him. _They_ were followers of Cæsar, and _he_ cast in his lot
with Pompey. But this made no difference in their relations. To the
contrary, they gave him advice and help; in their most hurried journeys
they found time to visit him, and they interceded with Cæsar in his
behalf. To determine whether he influenced the fortunes of the state
through the effect which his teachings had upon these young men would
require a paper by itself. Perhaps no man has ever had a better
opportunity than Cicero had in their cases to leave a lasting impression
on the political leaders of the coming generation. Curio, Cælius,
Trebatius, Dolabella, Hirtius, and Pansa, who were Cæsar's lieutenants, in
the years when their characters were forming and their political
tendencies were being determined, were moulded by Cicero. They were warmly
attached to him as their guide, philosopher, and friend, and they admired
him as a writer, an orator, and an accomplished man of the world. Later
they attached themselves to Cæsar, and while they were still under his
spell, Cicero's influence over their political course does not seem to
count for so much, but after Cæsar's death, the latent effect of Cicero's
friendship and teaching makes itself clearly felt in the heroic service
which such men as Hirtius and Pansa rendered to the cause of the dying
Republic. Possibly even Curio, had he been living, might have been found,
after the Ides of March, fighting by the side of Cicero.

Perhaps there is no better way of bringing out the intimate relations
which Curio and the other young men of this group bore to the orator than
by translating one of Cicero's early letters to him. It was written in 53
B.C., when the young man was in Asia, just beginning his political career
as quæstor, or treasurer, on the staff of the governor of that province,
and reads:[119]

"Although I grieve to have been suspected of neglect by you, still it has
not been so annoying to me that my failure in duty is complained of by you
as pleasant that it has been noticed, especially since, in so far as I am
accused, I am free from fault. But in so far as you intimate that you
long for a letter from me, you disclose that which I know well, it is
true, but that which is sweet and cherished--your love, I mean. In point
of fact, I never let any one pass, who I think will go to you, without
giving him a letter. For who is so indefatigable in writing as I am? From
you, on the other hand, twice or thrice at most have I received a letter,
and then a very short one. Therefore, if you are an unjust judge toward
me, I shall condemn you on the same charge, but if you shall be unwilling
to have me do that, you must show yourself just to me.

"But enough about letters; I have no fear of not satisfying you by
writing, especially if in that kind of activity you will not scorn my
efforts. I _did_ grieve that you were away from us so long, inasmuch as I
was deprived of the enjoyment of most delightful companionship, but now I
rejoice because, in your absence, you have attained all your ends without
sacrificing your dignity in the slightest degree, and because in all your
undertakings the outcome has corresponded to my desires. What my boundless
affection for you forces me to urge upon you is briefly put. So great a
hope is based, shall I say, on your spirit or on your abilities, that I do
not hesitate to beseech and implore you to come back to us with a
character so moulded that you may be able to preserve and maintain this
confidence in you which you have aroused. And since forgetfulness shall
never blot out my remembrance of your services to me, I beg you to
remember that whatever improvements may come in your fortune, or in your
station in life, you would not have been able to secure them, if you had
not as a boy in the old days followed my most loyal and loving counsels.
Wherefore you ought to have such a feeling toward us, that we, who are now
growing heavy with years, may find rest in your love and your youth."

In a most unexpected place, in one of Cicero's fiery invectives against
Antony,[120] we come upon an episode illustrating his affectionate care of
Curio during Curio's youth. The elder Curio lies upon a couch, prostrate
with grief at the wreck which his son has brought on the house by his
dissolute life and his extravagance. The younger Curio throws himself at
Cicero's feet in tears. Like a foster-father, Cicero induces the young
man to break off his evil habits, and persuades the father to forgive him
and pay his debts. This scene which he describes here, reminds us of
Curio's first appearance in Cicero's correspondence, where, with Curio's
wild life in mind, he is spoken of as _filiola Curionis_.[121]

It is an appropriate thing that a man destined to lead so stormy a life as
Curio did, should come on the stage as a leader in the wild turmoil of the
Clodian affair. What brought the two Curios to the front in this matter as
champions of Cicero's future enemy Clodius, it is not easy to say. It is
interesting to notice in passing, however, that our Curio enters politics
as a Democrat. He was the leader, in fact, of the younger element in that
party, of the "Catilinarian crowd," as Cicero styles them, and arrayed
himself against Lucullus, Hortensius, Messala, and other prominent
Conservatives. What the methods were which Curio and his followers
adopted, Cicero graphically describes.[122] They blocked up the entrances
to the polling places with professional rowdies, and allowed only one kind
of ballots to be distributed to the voters. This was in 61 B.C., when
Curio can scarcely have been more than twenty-three years old.

In the following year Cæsar was back in Rome from his successful
proprætorship in Spain, and found little difficulty in persuading Pompey
and Crassus to join him in forming that political compact which controlled
the fortunes of Rome for the next ten years. As a part of the agreement,
Cæsar was made consul in 59 B.C., and forced his radical legislation
through the popular assembly in spite of the violent opposition of the
Conservatives. This is the year, too, of the candidacy of Clodius for the
tribunate. Toward both these movements the attitude of Curio is puzzling.
He reports to Cicero[123] that Clodius's main object in running for the
tribunate is to repeal the legislation of Cæsar. It is strange that a man
who had been in the counsels of Clodius, and was so shrewd on other
occasions in interpreting political motives, can have been so deceived. We
can hardly believe that he was double-faced toward Cicero. We must
conclude, I think, that his strong dislike for Cæsar's policy and
political methods colored his view of the situation. His fierce opposition
to Cæsar is the other strange incident in this period of his life. Most
of the young men of the time, even those of good family, were enthusiastic
supporters of Cæsar. Curio, however, is bitterly opposed to him.[124]
Perhaps he resented Cæsar's repression of freedom of speech, for he tells
Cicero that the young men of Rome will not submit to the high-handed
methods of the triumvirs, or perhaps he imbibed his early dislike for
Cæsar from his father, whose sentiments are made clear enough by a savage
epigram at Cæsar's expense, which Suetonius quotes from a speech of the
elder Curio.[125] At all events he is the only man who dares speak out. He
is the idol of the Conservatives, and is surrounded by enthusiastic crowds
whenever he appears in the forum. He is now the recognized leader of the
opposition to Cæsar, and a significant proof of this fact is furnished at
the great games given in honor of Apollo in the summer of 59. When Cæsar
entered the theatre there was faint applause; when Curio entered the crowd
rose and cheered him, "as they used to cheer Pompey when the commonwealth
was safe."[126] Perhaps the mysterious Vettius episode, an ancient Titus
Oates affair, which belongs to this year, reflects the desire of the
triumvirs to get rid of Curio, and shows also their fear of his
opposition. This unscrupulous informer is said to have privately told
Curio of a plot against the life of Pompey, in the hope of involving him
in the meshes of the plot. Curio denounced him to Pompey, and Vettius was
thrown into prison, where he was afterward found dead, before the truth of
the matter could be brought out. Of course Curio's opposition to Cæsar
effected little, except, perhaps, in drawing Cæsar's attention to him as a
clever politician.

To Curio's quæstorship in Asia reference has already been made. It fell in
53 B.C., and from his incumbency of this office we can make an approximate
estimate of his date of birth. Thirty or thirty-one was probably the
minimum age for holding the quæstorship at this time, so that Curio must
have been born about 84 B.C. From Cicero's letter to him, which has been
given above, it would seem to follow that he had performed his duties in
his province with eminent success. During his absence from Rome his
father died, and with his father's death one stimulating cause of his
dislike for Cæsar may have disappeared. To Curio's absence in his province
we owe six of the charming letters which Cicero wrote to him. In one of
his letters of this year he writes:[127] "There are many kinds of letters,
as you well know, but one sort, for the sake of which letter-writing was
invented, is best recognized: I mean letters written for the purpose of
informing those who are not with us of whatever it may be to our advantage
or to theirs that they should know. Surely you are not looking for a
letter of this kind from me, for you have correspondents and messengers
from home who report to you about your household. Moreover, so far as my
concerns go, there is absolutely nothing new. There are two kinds of
letters left which please me very much: one, of the informal and jesting
sort; the other, serious and weighty. I do not feel that it is unbecoming
to adopt either of these styles. Am I to jest with you by letter? On my
word I do not think that there is a citizen who can laugh in these days.
Or shall I write something of a more serious character? What subject is
there on which Cicero can write seriously to Curio, unless it be
concerning the commonwealth? And on this matter this is my situation: that
I neither dare to set down in writing that which I think, nor wish to
write what I do not think."

The Romans felt the same indifference toward affairs in the provinces that
we show in this country, unless their investments were in danger. They
were wrapped up in their own concerns, and politics in Rome were so
absorbing in 53 B.C. that people in the city probably paid little
attention to the doings of a quæstor in the far-away province of Asia.
But, as the time for Curio's return approached, men recalled the striking
rôle which he played in politics in earlier days, and wondered what course
he would take when he came back. Events were moving rapidly toward a
crisis. Julia, Cæsar's daughter, whom Pompey had married, died in the
summer of 54 B.C., and Crassus was defeated and murdered by the Parthians
in 53 B.C. The death of Crassus brought Cæsar and Pompey face to face, and
Julia's death broke one of the strongest bonds which had held these two
rivals together. Cæsar's position, too, was rendered precarious by the
desperate struggle against the Belgæ, in which he was involved in 53 B.C.
In Rome the political pot was boiling furiously. The city was in the grip
of the bands of desperadoes hired by Milo and Clodius, who broke up the
elections during 53 B.C., so that the first of January, 52, arrived with
no chief magistrates in the city. To a man of Curio's daring and
versatility this situation offered almost unlimited possibilities, and
recognizing this fact, Cicero writes earnestly to him,[128] on the eve of
his return, to enlist him in support of Milo's candidacy for the
consulship. Curio may have just arrived in the city when matters reached a
climax, for on January 18, 52 B.C., Clodius was killed in a street brawl
by the followers of Milo, and Pompey was soon after elected sole consul,
to bring order out of the chaos, if possible.

Curio was not called upon to support Milo for the consulship, because
Milo's share in the murder of Clodius and the elevation of Pompey to his
extra-constitutional magistracy put an end to Milo's candidacy. What part
he took in supporting or in opposing Pompey's reform legislation of 52
B.C., and what share he had in the preliminary skirmishes between Cæsar
and the senate during the early part of 51, we have no means of knowing.
As the situation became more acute, however, toward the end of the year,
we hear of him again as an active political leader. Cicero's absence from
Rome from May, 51 to January, 49 B.C., is a fortunate thing for us, for to
it we owe the clever and gossipy political letters which his friend Cælius
sent him from the capital. In one of these letters, written August 1, 51
B.C., we learn that Curio is a candidate for the tribunate for the
following year, and in it we find a keen analysis of the situation, and an
interesting, though tantaizingly brief, estimate of his character. Coming
from an intimate friend of Curio, it is especially valuable to us. Cælius
writes:[129] "He inspires with great alarm many people who do not know him
and do not know how easily he can be influenced, but judging from my hopes
and wishes, and from his present behavior, he will prefer to support the
Conservatives and the senate. In his present frame of mind he is simply
bubbling over with this feeling. The source and reason of this attitude
of his lies in the fact that Cæsar, who is in the habit of winning the
friendship of men of the worst sort at any cost whatsoever, has shown a
great contempt for him. And of the whole affair it seems to me a most
delightful outcome, and the view has been taken by the rest, too, to such
a degree that Curio, who does nothing after deliberation, seems to have
followed a definite policy and definite plans in avoiding the traps of
those who had made ready to oppose his election to the tribunate--I mean
the Lælii, Antonii, and powerful people of that sort." Without strong
convictions or a settled policy, unscrupulous, impetuous, radical, and
changeable, these are the qualities which Cælius finds in Curio, and what
we have seen of his career leads us to accept the correctness of this
estimate. In 61 he had been the champion of Clodius, and the leader of the
young Democrats, while two years later we found him the opponent of Cæsar,
and an ultra-Conservative. It is in the light of his knowledge of Curio's
character, and after receiving this letter from Cælius, that Cicero writes
in December, 51 B.C., to congratulate him upon his election to the
tribunate. He begs him "to govern and direct his course in all matters in
accordance with his own judgment, and not to be carried away by the advice
of other people." "I do not fear," he says, "that you may do anything in a
fainthearted or stupid way, if you defend those policies which you
yourself shall believe to be right.... Commune with yourself, take
yourself into counsel, hearken to yourself, determine your own policy."

The other point in the letter of Cælius, his analysis of the political
situation, so far as Curio is concerned, is not so easy to follow. Cælius
evidently believes that Curio had coquetted with Cæsar and had been
snubbed by him, that his intrigues with Cæsar had at first led the
aristocracy to oppose his candidacy, but that Cæsar's contemptuous
treatment of his advances had driven him into the arms of the senatorial
party. It is quite possible, however, that an understanding may have been
reached between Cæsar and Curio even at this early date, and that Cæsar's
coldness and Curio's conservatism may both have been assumed. This would
enable Curio to pose as an independent leader, free from all obligations
to Cæsar, Pompey, or the Conservatives, and anxious to see fair play and
safeguard the interests of the whole people, an independent leader who
was driven over in the end to Cæsar's side by the selfish and factious
opposition of the senatorial party to his measures of reform and his
advocacy of even-handed justice for both Cæsar and Pompey.[130]

Whether Curio came to an understanding with Cæsar before he entered on his
tribunate or not, his policy from the outset was well calculated to make
the transfer of his allegiance seem forced upon him, and to help him carry
over to Cæsar the support of those who were not blinded by partisan
feelings. Before he had been in office a fortnight he brought in a bill
which would have annulled the law, passed by Cæsar in his consulship,
assigning land in Campania to Pompey's veterans.[131] The repeal of this
law had always been a favorite project with the Conservatives, and Curio's
proposal seemed to be directed equally against Cæsar and Pompey. In
February of 50 B.C. he brought in two bills whose reception facilitated
his passage to the Cæsarian party. One of them provided for the repair of
the roads, and, as Appian tells us,[132] although "he knew that he could
not carry any such measure, he hoped that Pompey's friends would oppose
him so that he might have that as an excuse for opposing Pompey." The
second measure was to insert an intercalary month. It will be remembered
that before Cæsar reformed the calendar, it was necessary to insert an
extra month in alternate years, and 50 B.C. was a year in which
intercalation was required. Curio's proposal was, therefore, a very proper
one. It would recommend itself also on the score of fairness. March 1 had
been set as the day on which the senate should take up the question of
Cæsar's provinces, and after that date there would be little opportunity
to consider other business. Now the intercalated month would have been
inserted, in accordance with the regular practice, after February 23, and
by its insertion time would have been given for the proper discussion of
the measures which Curio had proposed. Incidentally, and probably this was
in Curio's mind, the date when Cæsar might be called upon to surrender his
provinces would be postponed. The proposal to insert the extra month was
defeated, and Curio, blocked in every move by the partisan and
unreasonable opposition of Pompey and the Conservatives, found the
pretext for which lie had been working, and came out openly for
Cæsar.[133] Those who knew him well were not surprised at the transfer of
his allegiance. It was probably in fear of such a move that Cicero had
urged him not to yield to the influence of others, and when Cicero in
Cilicia hears the news, he writes to his friend Cælius: "Is it possible?
Curio is now defending Cæsar! Who would have expected it?--except myself,
for, as surely as I hope to live, _I_ expected it. Heavens! how I miss the
laugh we might have had over it." Looking back, as we can now, on the
political rôle which Curio played during the next twelve months, it seems
strange that two of his intimate friends, who were such far-sighted
politicians as Cicero and Cælius were, should have underestimated his
political ability so completely. It shows Cæsar's superior political
sagacity that he clearly saw his qualities as a leader and tactician. What
terms Cæsar was forced to make to secure his support we do not know.
Gossip said that the price was sixty million sesterces,[134] or more than
two and a half million dollars. He was undoubtedly in great straits. The
immense sums which he had spent in celebrating funeral games in honor of
his father had probably left him a bankrupt, and large amounts of money
were paid for political services during the last years of the republic.
Naturally proof of the transaction cannot be had, and even Velleius
Paterculus, in his savage arraignment of Curio,[135] does not feel
convinced of the truth of the story, but the tale is probable.

It was high time for Cæsar to provide himself with an agent in Rome. The
month of March was near at hand, when the long-awaited discussion of his
provinces would come up in the senate. His political future, and his
rights as a citizen, depended upon his success in blocking the efforts of
the senate to take his provinces from him before the end of the year, when
he could step from the proconsulship to the consulship. An interval of
even a month in private life between the two offices would be all that his
enemies would need for bringing political charges against him that would
effect his ruin. His displacement before the end of the year must be
prevented, therefore, at all hazards. To this task Curio addressed
himself, and with surpassing adroitness. He did not come out at once as
Cæsar's champion. His function was to hold the scales true between Cæsar
and Pompey, to protect the Commonwealth against the overweening ambition
and threatening policy of both men. He supported the proposal that Cæsar
should be called upon to surrender his army, but coupled with it the
demand that Pompey also should be required to give up his troops and his
proconsulship. The fairness of his plan appealed to the masses, who would
not tolerate a favor to Pompey at Cæsar's expense. It won over even a
majority of the senate. The cleverness of his policy was clearly shown at
a critical meeting of the senate in December of the year 50 B.C. Appian
tells us the story:[136] "In the senate the opinion of each member was
asked, and Claudius craftily divided the question and took the votes
separately, thus: 'Shall Pompey be deprived of his command?' The majority
voted against the latter proposition, and it was decreed that successors
to Cæsar should be sent. Then Curio put the question whether both should
lay down their commands, and twenty-two voted in the negative, while
three hundred and seventy went back to the opinion of Curio in order to
avoid civil discord. Then Claudius dismissed the senate, exclaiming:
'Enjoy your victory and have Cæsar for a master!'" The senate's action was
vetoed, and therefore had no legal value, but it put Cæsar and Curio in
the right and Pompey' s partisans in the wrong.

As a part of his policy of defending Cæsar by calling attention to the
exceptional position and the extra-constitutional course of Pompey, Curio
offset the Conservative attacks on Cæsar by public speeches fiercely
arraigning Pompey for what he had done during his consulship, five years
before. When we recall Curio's biting wit and sarcasm, and the
unpopularity of Pompey's high-handed methods of that year, we shall
appreciate the effectiveness of this flank attack.

Another weapon which he used freely was his unlimited right of veto as
tribune. As early as April Cælius appreciated how successful these tactics
would be, and he saw the dilemma in which they would put the
Conservatives, for he writes to Cicero: "This is what I have to tell you:
if they put pressure at every point on Curio, Cæsar will defend his right
to exercise the veto; if, as seems likely, they shrink [from overruling
him], Cæsar will stay [in his province] as long as he likes." The veto
power was the weapon which he used against the senate at the meeting of
that body on the first of December, to which reference has already been
made. The elections in July had gone against Cæsar. Two Conservatives had
been returned as consuls. In the autumn the senate had found legal means
of depriving Cæsar of two of his legions. Talk of a compromise was dying
down. Pompey, who had been desperately ill in the spring, had regained his
strength. He had been exasperated by the savage attacks of Curio.
Sensational stories of the movements of Cæsar's troops in the North were
whispered in the forum, and increased the tension. In the autumn, for
instance, Cæsar had occasion to pay a visit to the towns in northern Italy
to thank them for their support of Mark Antony, his candidate for the
tribunate, and the wild rumor flew to Rome that he had advanced four
legions to Placentia,[137] that his march on the city had begun, and
tumult and confusion followed. It was in these circumstances that the
consul Marcellus moved in the senate that successors be sent to take over
Cæsar's provinces, but the motion was blocked by the veto of Curio,
whereupon the consul cried out: "If I am prevented by the vote of the
senate from taking steps for the public safety, I will take such steps on
my own responsibility as consul." After saying this he darted out of the
senate and proceeded to the suburbs with his colleague, where he presented
a sword to Pompey, and said: "My colleague and I command you to march
against Cæsar in behalf of your country, and we give you for this purpose
the army now at Capua, or in any other part of Italy, and whatever
additional forces you choose to levy."[138] Curio had accomplished his
purpose. He had shown that Pompey as well as Cæsar was a menace to the
state; he had prevented Cæsar's recall; he had shown Antony, who was to
succeed him in the tribunate, how to exasperate the senate into using
coercive measures against his sacrosanct person as tribune and thus
justify Cæsar's course in the war, and he had goaded the Conservatives
into taking the first overt step in the war by commissioning Pompey to
begin a campaign against Cæsar without any authorization from the senate
or the people.

The news of the unconstitutional step taken by Marcellus and Pompey
reached Rome December 19 or 20. Curio's work as tribune was done, and on
the twenty-first of the month he set out for the North to join his leader.
The senate would be called together by the new consuls on January 1, and
since, before the reform in the calendar, December had only twenty-nine
days, there were left only eight days for Curio to reach Cæsar's
head-quarters, lay the situation before him, and return to the city with
his reply. Ravenna, where Cæsar had his head-quarters, was two hundred and
forty miles from Rome. He covered the distance, apparently, in three days,
spent perhaps two days with Cæsar, and was back in Rome again for the
meeting of the senate on the morning of January 1. Consequently, he
travelled at the rate of seventy-five or eighty miles a day, twice the
rate of the ordinary Roman courier.

We cannot regret too keenly the fact that we have no account of Curio's
meeting with Cæsar, and his recital to Cæsar of the course of events in
Rome. In drawing up the document which was prepared at this conference,
Cæsar must have been largely influenced by the intimate knowledge which
Curio had of conditions in the capital, and of the temper of the senate.
It was an ultimatum, and, when Curio presented it to the senate, that body
accepted the challenge, and called upon Cæsar to lay down his command on a
specified date or be declared a public enemy. Cæsar replied by crossing
the border of his province and occupying one town after another in
northern Italy in rapid succession. All this had been agreed upon in the
meeting between Curio and Cæsar, and Velleius Paterculus[139] is probably
right in putting the responsibility for the war largely on the shoulders
of Curio, who, as he says, brought to naught the fair terms of peace which
Cæsar was ready to propose and Pompey to accept. The whole situation
points to the conclusion that Cæsar did not desire war, and was not
prepared for it. Had he anticipated its immediate outbreak, he would
scarcely have let it arise when he had only one legion with him on the
border, while his other ten legions were a long distance away.

From the outset Curio took an active part in the war which he had done so
much to bring about, and it was an appropriate thing that the closing
events in his life should have been recorded for us by his great patron,
Cæsar, in his narrative of the Civil War. On the 18th or 19th of January,
within ten days of the crossing of the Rubicon, we hear of his being sent
with a body of troops to occupy Iguvium,[140] and a month later he is in
charge of one of the investing camps before the stronghold of
Corfinium.[141] With the fall of Corfinium, on the 21st of February,
Cæsar's rapid march southward began, which swept the Pompeians out of
Italy within a month and gave Cæsar complete control of the peninsula. In
that brilliant campaign Curio undoubtedly took an active part, for at the
close of it Cæsar gave him an independent commission for the occupation of
Sicily and northern Africa. No more important command could have been
given him, for Sicily and Africa were the granaries of Rome, and if the
Pompeians continued to hold them, the Cæsarians in Italy might be starved
into submission. To this ill-fated campaign Cæsar devotes the latter half
of the second book of his Civil War. In the beginning of his account of it
he remarks: "Showing at the outset a total contempt for the military
strength of his opponent, Publius Attius Varus, Curio crossed over from
Sicily, accompanied by only two of the four legions originally given him
by Cæsar, and by only five hundred cavalry."[142] The estimate which
Cælius had made of him was true, after all, at least in military affairs.
He was bold and impetuous, and lacked a settled policy. Where daring and
rapidity of movement could accomplish his purpose, he succeeded, but he
lacked patience in finding out the size and disposition of the enemy's
forces and calmness of judgment in comparing his own strength with that of
his foe. It was this weakness in his character as a military leader which
led him to join battle with Varus and Juba's lieutenant, Saburra, without
learning beforehand, as he might have done, that Juba, with a large army,
was encamped not six miles in the rear of Saburra. Curio's men were
surrounded by the enemy and cut down as they stood. His staff begged him
to seek safety in flight, but, as Cæsar writes,[143] "He answered without
hesitation that, having lost the army which Cæsar had entrusted to his
charge, he would never return to look him in the face, and with that
answer he died fighting."

Three years later the fortunes of war brought Cæsar to northern Africa,
and he traversed a part of the region where Curio's luckless campaign had
been carried on. With the stern eye of the trained soldier, he marked the
fatal blunders which Curio had made, but he recalled also the charm of his
personal qualities, and the defeat before Utica was forgotten in his
remembrance of the great victory which Curio had won for him,
single-handed, in Rome. Even Lucan, a partisan of the senate which Curio
had flouted, cannot withhold his admiration for Curio's brilliant career,
and his pity for Curio's tragic end. As he stands in imagination before
the fallen Roman leader, he exclaims:[144] "Happy wouldst thou be, O Rome,
and destined to bless thy people, had it pleased the gods above to guard
thy liberty as it pleased them to avenge its loss. Lo! the noble body of
Curio, covered by no tomb, feeds the birds of Libya. But to thee, since it
profiteth not to pass in silence those deeds of thine which their own
glory defends forever 'gainst the decay of time, such tribute now we pay,
O youth, as thy life has well deserved. No other citizen of such talent
has Rome brought forth, nor one to whom the law would be indebted more, if
he the path of right had followed out. As it was, the corruption of the
age ruined the city when desire for office, pomp, and the power which
wealth gives, ever to be dreaded, had swept away his wavering mind with
sidelong flood, and the change of Curio, snared by the spoils of Gaul and
the gold of Cæsar, was that which turned the tide of history. Although
mighty Sulla, fierce Marius, the blood-bespattered Cinna, and all the line
of Cæsar's house have held our throats at their mercy with the sword, to
whom was e'er such power vouchsafed? All others bought, _he_ sold the
state."




Gaius Matius, a Friend of Cæsar

"_Non enim Cæsarem ... sum secutus, sed amicum_."



Gaius Matius, the subject of this sketch, was neither a great warrior, nor
statesman, nor writer. If his claim to remembrance rested on what he did
in the one or the other of these rôles, he would long ago have been
forgotten. It is his genius for friendship which has kept his memory
green, and that is what he himself would have wished. Of his early life we
know little, but it does not matter much, because the interest which he
has for us centres about his relations to Cæsar in early manhood. Being of
good birth, and a man of studious tastes, he probably attended the
University at Athens, and heard lectures there as young Cicero and Messala
did at a later period. He must have been a man of fine tastes and
cultivation, for Cicero, in writing to a friend, bestows on Matius the
title "doctissimus," the highest literary compliment which one Roman could
pay another, and Apollodorus of Pergamum dedicated to him his treatise on
rhetoric. Since he was born about 84 B.C., he returned from his years of
study at Athens about the time when Cæsar was setting out on his brilliant
campaign in Gaul. Matius joined him, attracted perhaps by the personal
charms of the young proconsul, perhaps by the love of adventure, perhaps,
like his friend Trebatius, by the hope of making a reputation.

At all events he was already with Cæsar somewhere in Gaul in 53 B.C., and
it is hard to think of an experience better suited to lay bare the good
and the bad qualities in Cæsar's character than the years of camp life
which Matius spent with him in the wilds of Gaul and Britain. As
aide-de-camp, or orderly, for such a position he probably held, his place
was by Cæsar's side. They forded the rivers together, walked or rode
through woodland or open side by side, shared the same meagre rations, and
lay in the same tent at the end of the day's march, ready to spring from
the ground at a moment's warning to defend each other against attack from
the savage foe. Cæsar's narrative of his campaigns in Gaul is a soldier's
story of military movements, and perhaps from our school-boy remembrance
of it we may have as little a liking for it as Horace had for the poem of
Livius Andronicus, which he studied under "Orbilius of the rods," but even
the obscurities of the Latin subjunctive and ablative cannot have blinded
us entirely to the romance of the desperate siege of Alesia and the final
struggle which the Gauls made to drive back the invader. Matius shared
with Cæsar all the hardships and perils of that campaign, and with Cæsar
he witnessed the final scene of the tragedy when Vercingetorix, the heroic
Gallic chieftain, gave up his sword, and the conquest of Gaul was
finished. It is little wonder that Matius and the other young men who
followed Cæsar were filled with admiration of the man who had brought all
this to pass.

It was a notable group, including Trebatius, Hirtius, Pansa, Oppius, and
Matius in its number. All of them were of the new Rome. Perhaps they were
dimly conscious that the mantle of Tiberius Gracchus had fallen upon their
leader, that the great political struggle which had been going on for
nearly a century was nearing its end, and that they were on the eve of a
greater victory than that at Alesia. It would seem that only two of them,
Matius and Trebatius, lived to see the dawning of the new day. But it was
not simply nor mainly the brilliancy of Cæsar as a leader in war or in
politics which attracted Matius to him. As he himself puts it in his
letter to Cicero: "I did not follow a Cæsar, but a friend." Lucullus and
Pompey had made as distinguished a record in the East as Cæsar had in the
West, but we hear of no such group of able young men following their
fortunes as attached themselves to Cæsar. We must find a reason for the
difference in the personal qualities of Cæsar, and there is nothing that
more clearly proves the charm of his character than the devotion to him of
this group of men. In the group Matius is the best representative of the
man and the friend. When Cæsar came into his own, Matius neither asked for
nor accepted the political offices which Cæsar would gladly have given
him. One needs only to recall the names of Antony, Labienus, or Decimus
Brutus to realize the fact that Cæsar remembered and rewarded the faithful
services of his followers. But Matius was Cæsar's friend and nothing more,
not his master of the horse, as Antony was, nor his political and
financial heir, as Octavius was. In his loyalty to Cæsar he sought for no
other reward than Cæsar's friendship, and his services to him brought with
them their own return. Indeed, through his friend he suffered loss, for
one of Cæsar's laws robbed him of a part of his estate, as he tells us,
but this experience did not lessen his affection. How different his
attitude was from that of others who professed a friendship for Cæsar!
Some of them turned upon their leader and plotted against his life, when
disappointed in the favors which they had received at his hands, and
others, when he was murdered, used his name and his friendship for them to
advance their own ambitious designs. Antony and Octavius struggle with
each other to catch the reins of power which have fallen from his hands;
Dolabella, who seems to regard himself as an understudy of Cæsar, plays a
serio-comic part in Rome in his efforts to fill the place of the dead
dictator; while Decimus Brutus hurries to the North to make sure of the
province which Cæsar had given him.

From these men, animated by selfishness, by jealousy, by greed for gain,
by sentimentalism, or by hypocritical patriotism, Matius stands aloof,
and stands perhaps alone. For him the death of Cæsar means the loss of a
friend, of a man in whom he believed. He can find no common point of
sympathy either with those who rejoice in the death of the tyrant, as
Cicero does, for he had not thought Cæsar a tyrant, nor with those who use
the name of Cæsar to conjure with. We have said that he accepted no
political office. He did accept an office, that of procurator, or
superintendent, of the public games which Cæsar had vowed on the field of
Pharsalus, but which death had stepped in to prevent him from giving, and
it was in the pious fulfilment of this duty which he took upon himself
that he brought upon his head the anger of the "auctores libertatis," as
he ironically calls them. He had grieved, too, at the death of Cæsar,
although "a man ought to rate the fatherland above a friend," as the
liberators said. Matius took little heed of this talk. He had known of it
from the outset, but it had not troubled him. Yet when it came to his ears
that his friend Cicero, to whom he had been attached from boyhood, to whom
he had proved his fidelity at critical moments, was among his accusers, he
could not but complain bitterly of the injustice. Through a common
friend, Trebatius, whose acquaintance he had made in Gaul, he expresses to
Cicero the sorrow which he feels at his unkindness. What Cicero has to say
in explanation of his position and in defence of himself, we can do no
better than to give in his own words:


   "_Cicero to Matins, greeting:_[145]

   "I am not yet quite clear in my own mind whether our friend Trebatius,
   who is as loyal as he is devoted to both of us, has brought me more
   sorrow or pleasure: for I reached my Tusculan villa in the evening, and
   the next day, early in the morning, he came to see me, though he had
   not yet recovered his strength. When I reproved him for giving too
   little heed to his health, he said that nothing was nearer his heart
   than seeing me. 'There's nothing new,' say I? He told me of your
   grievance against me, yet before I make any reply in regard to it, let
   me state a few facts.

   "As far back as I can recall the past I have no friend of longer
   standing than you are; but long duration is a thing characteristic of
   many friendships, while love is not. I loved you on the day I met you,
   and I believed myself loved by you. Your subsequent departure, and that
   too for a long time, my electoral canvass, and our different modes of
   life did not allow our inclination toward one another to be
   strengthened by intimacy; still I saw your feeling toward me many years
   before the Civil War, while Cæsar was in Gaul; for the result which you
   thought would be of great advantage to me and not of disadvantage to
   Cæsar himself you accomplished: I mean in bringing him to love me, to
   honor me, to regard me as one of his friends. Of the many confidential
   communications which passed between us in those days, by word of mouth,
   by letter, by message, I say nothing, for sterner times followed. At
   the breaking out of the Civil War, when you were on your way toward
   Brundisium to join Cæsar, you came to me to my Formian villa. In the
   first place, how much did that very fact mean, especially at those
   times! Furthermore, do you think I have forgotten your counsel, your
   words, the kindness you showed? I remember that Trebatius was there.
   Nor indeed have I forgotten the letter which you sent to me after
   meeting Cæsar, in the district near Trebula, as I remember it. Next
   came that ill-fated moment when either my regard for public opinion, or
   my sense of duty, or chance, call it what you will, compelled me to go
   to Pompey. What act of kindness or thoughtfulness either toward me in
   my absence or toward my dear ones in Rome did you neglect? In fact,
   whom have all my friends thought more devoted to me and to themselves
   than you are? I came to Brundisium. Do you think I have forgotten in
   what haste, as soon as you heard of it, you came hurrying to me from
   Tarentum? How much your presence meant to me, your words of cheer to a
   courage broken by the fear of universal disaster! Finally, our life at
   Rome began. What element did our friendship lack? In most important
   matters I followed your advice with reference to my relations toward
   Cæsar; in other matters I followed my own sense of duty. With whom but
   myself, if Cæsar be excepted, have you gone so far as to visit his
   house again and again, and to spend there many hours, oftentimes in the
   most delightful discourse? It was then too, if you remember, that you
   persuaded me to write those philosophical essays of mine. After his
   return, what purpose was more in your thoughts than to have me as good
   a friend of Cæsar as possible? This you accomplished at once.

   "What is the point, then, of this discourse, which is longer than I had
   intended it should be? This is the point, that I have been surprised
   that you, who ought to see these things, have believed that I have
   taken any step which is out of harmony with our friendly relations, for
   beside these facts which I have mentioned, which are undisputed and
   self-evident facts, there are many more intimate ties of friendship
   which I can scarcely put in words. Everything about you charms me, but
   most of all, on the one hand, your perfect loyalty in matters of
   friendship, your wisdom, dignity, steadfastness; on the other hand,
   your wit, refinement, and literary tastes.

   "Wherefore--now I come back to the grievance--in the first place, I did
   not think that you had voted for that law; in the second place, if I
   had thought so, I should never have thought that you had done it
   without some sufficient reason. Your position makes whatever you do
   noticeable; furthermore, envy puts some of your acts in a worse light
   than the facts warrant. If you do not hear these rumors I do not know
   what to say. So far as I am concerned, if I ever hear them I defend you
   as I know that _I_ am always defended by _you_ against _my_ detractors.
   And my defence follows two lines: there are some things which I always
   deny _in toto_, as, for instance, the statement in regard to that very
   vote; there are other acts of yours which I maintain were dictated by
   considerations of affection and kindness, as, for instance, your action
   with reference to the management of the games. But it does not escape
   you, with all your wisdom, that, if Cæsar was a king--which seems to me
   at any rate to have been the case--with respect of your duty two
   positions may be maintained, either the one which I am in the habit of
   taking, that your loyalty and friendship to Cæsar are to be praised, or
   the one which some people take, that the freedom of one's fatherland is
   to be esteemed more than the life of one's friend. I wish that my
   discussions springing out of these conversations had been repeated to
   you.

   "Indeed, who mentions either more gladly or more frequently than I the
   two following facts, which are especially to your honor? The fact that
   you were the most influential opponent of the Civil War, and that you
   were the most earnest advocate of temperance in the moment of victory,
   and in this matter I have found no one to disagree with me. Wherefore I
   am grateful to our friend Trebatius for giving me an opportunity to
   write this letter, and if you are not convinced by it, you will think
   me destitute of all sense of duty and kindness; and nothing more
   serious to me than that or more foreign to your own nature can happen."

In all the correspondence of Cicero there is not a letter written with
more force and delicacy of feeling, none better suited to accomplish its
purpose than this letter to Matius. It is a work of art; but in that fact
lies its defect, and in that respect it is in contrast to the answer which
it called forth from Matius, The reply of Matius stands on a level with
another better-known non-Ciceronian epistle, the famous letter of
condolence which Servius wrote to Cicero after the death of Cicero's
daughter, Tullia; but it is finer, for, while Servius is stilted and full
of philosophical platitudes, Matius, like Shakespeare's Antony, "only
speaks right on," in telling Cicero of his grief at Cæsar's death, of his
indignation at the intolerant attitude of the assassins, and his
determination to treasure the memory of Cæsar at any cost. This is his
letter:


   "_Matius to Cicero, greeting_[146]

   "I derived great pleasure from your letter, because I saw that you held
   such an opinion about me as I had hoped you would hold, and wished you
   to hold; and although, in regard to that opinion, I had no misgivings,
   still, inasmuch as I considered it a matter of the greatest importance,
   I was anxious that it should continue unchanged. And then I was
   conscious of having done nothing to offend any good citizen; therefore
   I was the less inclined to believe that you, endowed as you are with so
   many excellent qualities, could be influenced by any idle rumors,
   especially as my friendship toward you had been and was sincere and
   unbroken. Since I know that matters stand in this respect as I have
   wished them to stand, I will reply to the charges, which you have often
   refuted in my behalf in such a way as one would expect from that
   kindness of heart characteristic of you and from our friendship. It is
   true that what men said against me after the death of Cæsar was known
   to me. They call it a sin of mine that I sorrow over the death of a man
   dear to me, and because I grieve that he whom I loved is no more, for
   they say that 'fatherland should be above friendship,' just as if they
   had proved already that his death has been of service to the state. But
   I will make no subtle plea. I confess that I have not attained to your
   high philosophic planes; for, on the one hand, in the Civil War I did
   not follow a Cæsar, but a friend, and although I was grieved at the
   state of things, still I did not desert him; nor, on the other hand,
   did I at any time approve of the Civil War, nor even of the reason for
   strife, which I most earnestly sought to extinguish when it was
   kindling. Therefore, in the moment of victory for one bound to me by
   the closest ties, I was not captivated by the charm either of public
   office or of gold, while his other friends, although they had less
   influence with him than I, misused these rewards in no small degree.
   Nay, even my own property was impaired by a law of Cæsar's, thanks to
   which very law many who rejoice at the death of Cæsar have remained at
   Rome. I have worked as for my own welfare that conquered citizens might
   be spared.

   "Then may not I, who have desired the welfare of all, be indignant
   that he, from whom this favor came, is dead? especially since the very
   men who were forgiven have brought him both unpopularity and death. You
   shall be punished, then, they say, 'since you dare to disapprove of our
   deed.' Unheard of arrogance, that some men glory in their crime, that
   others may not even sorrow over it without punishment! But it has
   always been the unquestioned right, even of slaves, to fear, to
   rejoice, to grieve according to the dictates of their own feelings
   rather than at the bidding of another man; of these rights, as things
   stand now, to judge from what these champions of freedom keep saying,
   they are trying to deprive us by intimidation; but their efforts are
   useless. I shall never be driven by the terrors of any danger from the
   path of duty or from the claims of friendship, for I have never thought
   that a man should shrink from an honorable death; nay, I have often
   thought that he should seek it. But why are they angry at me, if I wish
   them to repent of their deed? for I desire to have Cæsar's death a
   bitter thing to all men.

   "'But I ought as a citizen to desire the welfare of the state.' Unless
   my life in the past and my hope for the future, without words from me,
   prove that I desire that very end, I do not seek to establish the fact
   by words. Wherefore I beg you the more earnestly to consider deeds more
   than words, and to believe, if you feel that it is well for the right
   to prevail, that I can have no intercourse with dishonorable men. For
   am I now, in my declining years, to change that course of action which
   I maintained in my youth, when I might even have gone astray with hope
   of indulgence, and am I to undo my life's work? I will not do so. Yet I
   shall take no step which may be displeasing to any man, except to
   grieve at the cruel fate of one most closely bound to me, of one who
   was a most illustrious man. But if I were otherwise minded, I would
   never deny what I was doing lest I should be regarded as shameless in
   doing wrong, a coward and a hypocrite in concealing it.

   "'Yet the games which the young Cæsar gave in memory of Cæsar's victory
   I superintended.' But that has to do with my private obligation and not
   with the condition of the state; a duty, however, which I owed to the
   memory and the distinguished position of a dear friend even though he
   was dead, a duty which I could not decline when asked by a young man of
   most excellent promise and most worthy of Cæsar. 'I even went
   frequently to the house of the consul Antony to pay my respects!' to
   whom you will find that those who think that I am lacking in devotion
   to my country kept coming in throngs to ask some favor forsooth or
   secure some reward. But what arrogance this is that, while Cæsar never
   interfered with my cultivating the friendship of men whom I pleased,
   even when he himself did not like them, these men who have taken my
   friend from me should try to prevent me by their slander from loving
   those whom I will.

   "But I am not afraid lest the moderation of my life may prove too weak
   to withstand false reports, or that even those who do not love me
   because of my loyalty to Cæsar may not prefer to have friends like me
   rather than like themselves. So far as I myself am concerned, if what I
   prefer shall be my lot, the life which is left me I shall spend in
   retirement at Rhodes; but if some untoward circumstance shall prevent
   it, I shall live at Rome in such a wise as to desire always that right
   be done. Our friend Trebatius I thank heartily in that he has disclosed
   your sincere and friendly feeling toward me, and has shown me that him
   whom I have always loved of my own free will I ought with the more
   reason to esteem and honor. Bene vale et me dilige."

With these words our knowledge of Matius comes almost to an end. His life
was prolonged into the imperial period, and, strangely enough, in one of
the few references to him which we find at a later date, he is
characterized as "the friend of Augustus" (divi Augusti amicus). It would
seem that the affection which he felt for Cæsar he transferred to Cæsar's
heir and successor. He still holds no office or title. In this connection
it is interesting to recall the fact that we owe the best of Cicero's
philosophical work to him, the "Academics," the "De Finibus," and the
"Tusculan Questions," for Cicero tells us in his letter that he was
induced to write his treatises on philosophy by Matius. It is a pleasant
thing to think that to him we may also be indebted for Cicero's charming
essay "On Friendship." The later life of Matius, then, we may think was
spent in retirement, in the study of philosophy, and in the pursuit of
literature. His literary pursuits give a homely and not unpleasant touch
to his character. They were concerned with gastronomy, for Columella, in
the first century of our era, tells us[147] that Matius composed three
books, bearing the titles of "The Cook," "The Butler," and "The
Picklemaker," and his name was transmitted to a later generation in a dish
known as "mincemeat à la Matius" (_minutal Matianum_).[148] He passes out
of the pages of history in the writings of Pliny the Elder as the man who
"invented the practice of clipping shrubbery."[149] To him, then, we
perhaps owe the geometrical figures, and the forms of birds and beasts
which shrubs take in the modern English garden. His memory is thus ever
kept green, whether in a way that redounds to his credit or not is left
for the reader to decide.




Index



Acta Diurna.
Anoyran monument.
Anglo-Saxons, compared with Romans,
  in government;
  in private affairs.
Arval Hymn, the.
Ascoli's theory of the differentiation of the Romance languages.
Augustus,
  "Res Gestæ";
  his benefactions.

Batha, a municipal expense.
Benefactions, private,
  co-operation with the government;
  _objects_;
  comparison of ancient and modern objects;
  of Æmilius;
  of Pompey;
  of Augustus;
  motives;
  expected of prominent men;
  attempts at regulation;
  a recognized responsibility;
  a legal obligation on municipal officials;
  offices thereby limited to the rich;
  of rich private citizens;
  effect on municipal life and character;
  on private citizens;
  charity.
Burial societies.

Cælius, estimate of Curio.
Cæsar,
  expenditures as sedile;
  and Curio;
  secures Curio as agent in Rome;
  unprepared for civil war;
  _et passim_ in chapters on Curio and Matius.
Cato the elder, his diction.
Charity.
Church, the Christian, influence on the spread of Latin.
Cicero,
  quotation from a letter in colloquial style;
  his "corrupt practices act,";
  and Scaptius;
  and Curio;
  _correspondence_ with Matius.
Civic pride of Romans.
Civil war, outbreak of.
Combinations in restraint of trade;
  government intervention.
Common people,
  their language logical;
  progressive and conservative elements.
Common people of Rome,
  their language (see _Latin, colloquial_);
  their religious beliefs;
  philosophy of life;
  belief in future life.
Controversiae of the schools of rhetoric.
Corporations;
  aid the government;
  collect taxes;
  in politics;
  many small stockholders.
Cromer, Lord, "Ancient and Modern Imperialism,".
Curio,
  funeral games in his father's honor;
character;
  family;
  relations with Cicero;
  beginning of public life;
  relations with Cæsar;
  openly espouses Cæsar's cause;
  popularity;
  as quæstor;
  in the Clodian affair;
  Cælius's opinion of him;
  as tribune;
  relations with Pompey;
  forces conservatives to open hostilities;
  his part in the civil war;
  death.

Dacia, Latin in.
Dialects in Italy, their disappearance.
Diez, the Romance philologist.
Diocletian's policy;
  his edict to regulate prices;
  content;
  discovery of document;
  amount extant;
  date;
  style;
  provisions of the edict;
  extracts;
  discussion;
  made prices uniform;
  its prices are retail;
  interesting deductions;
  effect;
  repeal.

English language in India.
Epitaphs,
  deal with the common people;
  length of Roman epitaphs;
  along Appian Way;
  sentiments expressed;
  show religious beliefs;
  gods rarely named;
  Mother Earth.
Epitaphs, metrical,
  praises of women predominate;
  literary merit;
  art.
Étienne, Henri, first scholar to notice colloquial Latin.

Food,
  cost of, comparison with to-day;
  free distribution of.

Gracchi, the.
Greek language,
  in Italy;
  not conquered by Latin;
  influence on Latin.
Gröber's theory of the differentiation of the Romance languages;
  criticism of.
Guilds;
  were non-political;
  inscriptional evidence;
  comparison of conditions in East and West;
  objects;
  dinners;
  temples;
  rules;
  no attempts to raise wages;
  religious character;
  began to enter politics;
  attitude of government toward;
  decline.

Hempl's theory of language rivalry.
Horace, his "curiosa felicitas,".

Inscription from Pompeii, in colloquial Latin.

Julia, death of.
Julian's edict to regulate the price of grain.

Labor-unions. (See _Guilds_.)
Lactantius, "On the Deaths of Those Who Persecuted (the Christians),".
Languages spoken in Italy in the early period;
  influence of other languages on Latin, 22. (See also _Greek_.)
Latin language,
  extent;
  unifying influences;
  uniformity;
  evidence of inscriptions;
  causes of its spread;
    colonies;
    roads;
    merchants;
    soldiers;
    government officials;
    the church;
    its superiority not a factor;
    sentiment a cause;
    "peaceful invasion,".
Latin, colloquial, its study neglected till recently;
  first noticed in modern times by Henri Étienne;
  its forms, how determined;
  ancient authority for its existence;
  evidence of the Romance languages;
  aid derived from a knowledge of spoken English;
  analytical formation of tenses;
  slang;
  extant specimens;
  causes of variation;
  external influences on;
  influence of culture;
  definition of colloquial Latin;
  relation to literary Latin;
  careless pronunciation;
  accent different from literary Latin;
  confusion of genders;
  monotonous style;
  tendencies in vocabulary, 64-7:
    in syntax;
  effect of loss of final letters;
  reunion with literary Latin;
  still exists in the Romance languages;
  date when it became the separate Romance language;
  specimens quoted.
Latin, literary,
  modelled on Greek;
  relation to colloquial Latin;
  standardized by grammarians;
  style unnatural;
  reunion with colloquial Latin;
  disappearance.
Latin, preliterary.
Laws of the Twelve Tables;
  excerpt from.
Living, cost of, comparison with to-day.
Livius Andronicus.
Lucan's account of the death of Curio.

Matius, Gaius,
  early life and character;
  with Cæsar in Gaul;
  friendship with Cæsar, _passim_;
  accepted no office;
  devotion to Cæsar;
  unpopularity due to it;
  correspondence with Cicero;
  defence of his devotion to Cæsar;
  prompted Cicero's best philosophical works;
  later life;
  literary works.
Menippean satire.
Milesian tales.
Money, unit of.

Nævius.
Ninus romance;
  and Petronius.

Organization, of capitalists (see _Corporations_);
  of labor (see _Guilds_).
Oscan.

Paternalism,
  beginnings of, in Rome;
  effect on people.
Patron, office of;
  benefactions of.
Pervigilium Veneris.
Petronius, Satiræ;
  excerpt from;
  original size;
  motif;
  Trimalchio's Dinner;
  satirical spirit;
  literary criticism;
  Horatian humor;
  cynical attitude;
  realism;
  prose-poetic form;
  origin of this genre of literature;
  the Satiræ and the epic;
  and the heroic romance;
  and the Menippean satire;
  and the Milesian tale;
  and the prologue of comedy;
  and the mime;
  the Satiræ perhaps a mixture of many types;
  originated with Petronius.
Plautus.
Poetry of the common people,
  dedicatory;
  ephemeral;
  graffiti;
  borrowed from the Augustan poets;
  folk poetry;
  children's jingles.
Pompey,
  his benefactions;
  ordered to march against Cæsar;
  _et passim_ in chapter on Curio.
Prices,
  controlled by corporations;
  attempts at government regulation.
Probus, the "Appendix" of.
Prose-poetic form.

Ritschl, the Plautine scholar.
Romance, the realistic, origin obscure.
  (See _Petronius, Satiræ_.)
Romance languages,
  causes of their differentiation, Gröber's theory;
  Ascoli's theory;
  date of their beginning;
  descended from colloquial Latin;
  reasons of their agreement;
  common source.
Romances, the Greek, theory of origin.

Salaries of municipal officers.
  (See also _Wages_.)
Scaptius and Cicero.
Seneca the elder, "Controversiæ,".
Strasburg oath.
Strikes.

Theatres a municipal expense.
Trimalchio's Dinner.

Umbrian.
Urso, constitution of.

Wages in Roman times;
  compared with to-day;
  and guilds;
  and slavery.
  (See also _Salaries_.)




Footnotes



[1] _Cf._ A. Ernout, _Le Parler de Préneste_, Paris, 1905.

[2] The relation between Latin and the Italic dialects may be illustrated
by an extract or two from them with a Latin translation. An Umbrian
specimen may be taken from one of the bronze tablets found at Iguvium,
which reads in Umbrian: Di Grabouie, saluo seritu ocrem Fisim, saluam
seritu totam Iiouinam (_Iguvinian Tables_ VI, a. 51), and in Latin: Deus
Grabovi, salvam servato arcem Fisiam, salvam servato civitatem Iguvinam. A
bit of Oscan from the Tabula Bantina (Tab. Bant. 2, 11) reads: suaepis
contrud exeic fefacust auti comono hipust, molto etanto estud, and in
Latin: siquis contra hoc fecerit aut comitia habuerit, multa tanta esto.

[3] _Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum_, IX, 782, furnishes a case in point.

[4] _Cf._ G. Mohl, _Introduction à la chronologie du Latin vulgaire_,
Paris, 1899.

[5] Pauly-Wissowa, _Real-Encyclopadie_, IV, 1179 _ff._

[6] Marquardt, _Römische Staatsverwaltung_, II, p. 463.

[7] _Cf._, _e.g._, Pirson, _La langue des inscriptions Latines de la
Gaule_, Bruxelles, 1901; Carnoy, _Le Latin d'Espagne d'après les
inscriptions_, Bruxelles, 1906; Hoffmann, _De titulis Africæ Latinis
quæstiones phoneticæ_, 1907; Kuebler, _Die lateinische Sprache auf
afrikanischen Inschriften_ (_Arch, für lat. Lex._, vol. VIII), and Martin,
_Notes on the Syntax of the Latin Inscriptions Found in Spain_, Baltimore,
1909.

[8] _Cf._ L. Hahn, _Rom und Romanismus im griechisch-römischen Osten_
(esp. pp. 222-268), Leipzig, 1906.

[9] _Proceedings of the American Philological Association_, XXIX (1898),
pp. 31-47. For a different theory of the results of language-conflict,
_cf._ Gröber, _Grundriss der romanischen Philologie_, I, pp. 516, 517.

[10] A very interesting sketch of the history of the Latin language in
this region may be seen in Ovide Densusianu's _Histoire de la langue
Roumaine_, Paris, 1902.

[11] Gorra, _Lingue Neolatine_, pp. 66-68.

[12] Gröber, _Grundriss der romanischen Philologie_, pp. 517 and 524.

[13] _Cf._ Gröber in _Archiv für lateinische Lexikographie und Grammatik_,
I, p. 210 _ff._

[14] _Is Modern-Language Teaching a Failure?_ Chicago, 1907.

[15] _Cf._ Abbott, _History of Rome_, pp. 246-249.

[16] Schuchardt, _Vokalismus des Vulgärlateins, I_, 103 _ff._

[17] _Cf._ Gröber, _Archiv für lateinische Lexikographie und Grammatik_,
I, 45.

[18] Thielmann, _Archiv_, II, 48 _ff._; 157 _ff._

[19] From the "Laws of the Twelve Tables" of the fifth century B.C. See
Bruns, _Fontes iuris Romani antiqui_, sixth edition, p. 31.

[20] _Appendix Probi_, in Keil's _Grammatici Latini_, IV, 197 _ff._

[21] "The Accent in Vulgar and Formal Latin," in _Classical Philology_, II
(1907), 445 _ff._

[22] Bücheler, _Carmina Latina epigraphica_, No. 53. The originals of all
the bits of verse which are translated in this paper may be found in the
collection whose title is given here. Hereafter reference to this work
will be by number only.

[23] No. 443.

[24] No. 92.

[25] No. 128.

[26] No. 127.

[27] No. 876.

[28] No. 1414.

[29] No. 765.

[30] No. 843.

[31] No. 95.

[32] No. 1578.

[33] Nos. 1192 and 1472.

[34] No. 1037.

[35] No. 1039.

[36] G. W. Van Bleek, Quae de hominum post mortem eondicione doceant
carmina sepulcralia Latina.

[37] No. 1495.

[38] No. 1496.

[39] No. 86.

[40] No. 1465.

[41] No. 1143.

[42] No. 1559.

[43] No. 1433.

[44] No. 225.

[45] No. 143.

[46] No. 83.

[47] No. 1500.

[48] No. 190.

[49] No. 244.

[50] No. 1499.

[51] No. 856.

[52] Society and Politics in Ancient Rome, p. 183.

[53] No. 562.

[54] No. 52.

[55] No. 1251.

[56] No. 106.

[57] No. 967.

[58] No. 152.

[59] No. 1042.

[60] No. 1064.

[61] No. 98.

[62] Bücheler, _Carmina Latino epigraphica_, No. 899.

[63] No. 19.

[64] No. 866.

[65] No. 863.

[66] No. 937.

[67] No. 949.

[68] No. 943.

[69] No. 945.

[70] No. 354.

[71] _Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum_, IV, 6892.

[72] Bücheler, No. 928.

[73] No. 333.

[74] No. 931.

[75] No. 933.

[76] No. 38.

[77] No. 270.

[78] Habeat scabiem quisquis ad me venerit novissimus.

[79] Rex erit qui recte faciet, qui non faciet non erit.

[80]

    Gallos Cæsar in triumphum ducit, idem in curiam;
    Galli bracas deposuerunt, latum clavom sumpserunt.

[81]

    Brutus quia reges eiecit, consul primus factus est;
    Hic quia consoles eiecit, rex postremo factus est.

[82] Salva Roma, salva patria, salvus est Germanicus.

[83] _Cf._ Schmid, "Der griechische Roman," _Neue Jahrb._, Bd XIII (1904),
465-85; Wilcken, in _Hermes_, XXVIII, 161 _ff._, and in _Archiv f.
Papyrusforschung_, I, 255 _ff._; Grenfell-Hunt, _Fayûm Towns and Their
Papyri_ (1900), 75 _ff._, and _Rivista di Filologia_, XXIII, I _ff._

[84] Some of the important late discussions of the Milesian tale are by
Bürger, _Hermes_ (1892), 351 _ff._; Norden, _Die antike Kunstprosa_, II,
602, 604, n.; Rohde, _Kleine Schriften_, II, 25 _ff._; Bürger, _Studien
zur Geschichte d. griech. Romans_, I (_Programm von Blankenburg a. H._,
1902); W. Schmid, _Neue Jahrb. f. d. klass. Alt._ (1904), 474 _ff._;
Lucas, "Zu den Milesiaca des Aristides," _Philologus_, 61 (1907), 16 _ff._

[85] On the origin of the _prosimetrum cf._ Hirzel, _Der Dialog_, 381
_ff._; Norden, _Die antike Kunstprosa_, 755.

[86] _Cf._ Rosenbluth, _Beiträge zur Quellenkunde von Petrons Satiren_.
Berlin, 1909.

[87] This theory in the main is suggested by Rohde, _Der griechische
Roman_, 2d ed., 267 (Leipzig, 1900), and by Ribbeck, _Geschichte d. röm.
Dichtung_, 2d ed., III, 150.

[88] _Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum_, vol. III, pp. 1926-1953. Mommsen's
text with a commentary has been published by H. Blümner, in _Der
Maximaltarif des Diocletian_, Berlin, 1893. A brief description of the
edict may be found in the Pauly-Wissowa _Real-Encyclopadie der classischen
Altertumswissenschaft_, under "Edictum Diocletiani," and K. Bücher has
discussed some points in it in the _Zeitschrift für die gesamte
Staatswissenschaft_, vol. L (1894), pp. 189-219 and 672-717.

[89] The method of arrangement may be illustrated by an extract from the
first table, which deals with grain and vegetables.

[90] The present-day prices which are given in the third column of these
two tables are taken from Bulletin No. 77 of the Bureau of Labor, and from
the majority and minority reports of the Select Committee of the U.S.
Senate on "Wages and Prices of Commodities" (Report, No. 912, Documents,
Nos. 421 and 477). In setting down a number to represent the current price
of an article naturally a rough average had to be struck of the rates
charged in different parts of the country. Bulletin No. 77, for instance,
gives the retail price charged for butter at 226 places in 68 different
cities, situated in 39 different States. At one point in Illinois the
price quoted in 1906 was 22 cents, while at a point in Pennsylvania 36
cents was reported, but the prevailing price throughout the country ranged
from 26 to 32, so that these figures were set down in the table. A similar
method has been adopted for the other items. A special difficulty arises
in the case of beef, where the price varies according to the cut. The
price of wheat is not given in the extant fragment of the edict, but has
been calculated by Blümner from statements in ancient writers. So far as
the wages of the ancient and modern workman are concerned we must remember
that the Roman laborer in many cases received "keep" from his employer.
Probably from one-third to three-sevenths should be added to his daily
wage to cover this item. Statistics published by the Department of
Agriculture show that the average wage of American farm laborers per month
during 1910 was $27.50 without board and $19.21 with board. The item of
board, therefore, is three-sevenths of the money paid to the laborer when
he keeps himself. One other point of difference between ancient and modern
working conditions must be borne in mind in attempting a comparison. We
have no means of knowing the length of the Roman working day. However, it
was probably much longer than our modern working day, which, for
convenience' sake, is estimated at eight hours.

[91] Wholesale price in 1909.

[92] Receives "keep" also.

[93] Eight-hour day assumed.

[94] _Cf._ Report of the Commissioner of Labor, pp. 622-625. In England
between one-third and one-fourth; _cf._ Bulletin, No. 77, p. 345.

[95] _Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum_, II, 5489.

[96] Wilmanns, _Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum_, 1772.

[97] _Ibid._, 2037.

[98] _Ibid._, 1859.

[99] _Ibid._, 2054.

[100] _Ibid._, 2099.

[101] 23:48_f._

[102] _Cic., ad Att._, 5.21. 10-13; 6.1. 5-7; 6.2.7; 6.3.5.

[103] 6.17.

[104] _Captivi_, 489 _ff._

[105] _Livy_, 38. 35.

[106] Plautus, _Pseudolus_, 189.

[107] Some of the most important discussions of workmen's guilds among the
Romans are to be found in Waltzing's _Etude historique sur les
corporations professionnelles chez les Romains_, 3 vols., Louvain, 1895-9;
Liebenam's _Zur Geschichte und Organisation des römischen Vereinswesen_,
Leipzig, 1890; Ziebarth's _Das Griechische Vereinswesen_, Leipzig, 1896,
pp. 96-110; Kornemann's article, "Collegium," in the Pauly-Wissowa _Real
Encyclopadie_. Other literature is cited by Waltzing, I, pp. 17-30, and by
Kornemann, IV, columns 479-480.

[108] _Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum_, XI, 5047.

[109] _Ibid._, V, 7906.

[110] _Ibid._, III, p. 953.

[111] _Ibid._, VIII, 14683.

[112] _Ibid._, III, 3583.

[113] _Ibid._, XIV, 2112.

[114] _Ibid._, XIV, 326.

[115] _E.g._, Clodius and Milo.

[116] Lucan, 4. 814 _ff._; Velleius, 2. 48; Pliny, Nat. Hist., 7. 116
_ff._

[117] Cicero, Brutus, 122, 210, 214.

[118] _Ibid._, 280.

[119] Cicero, _Epist. ad Fam._, 2. 1.

[120] Cicero, _Phil._, 2. 45 _f._

[121] Cicero, _ad Att._, 1. 14. 5.

[122] _Ibid._, 1. 14. 5.

[123] _Ibid._, 2. 12. 2.

[124] _Ibid._, 2.7.3; 2.8.1; 2.12.2.

[125] Suet., _Julius_, 52.

[126]_Ad Att._, 2. 19. 3.

[127] _Ad fam._, 2.4.

[128] _Ibid._, 2.6.

[129]_Ibid._, 8. 4. 2.

[130] Dio's account (40. 61) of Curio's course seems to harmonize with
this interpretation.

[131] "Cicero, _ad fam._, 8.10.4.

[132] White's Civil Wars of Appian, 2.27.

[133] Cicero, _ad fam._, 8.6.5.

[134] Valerius Maximus, 9.1.6.

[135] Vell. Pat., 2.48.

[136] Civil Wars, 2.30.

[137] _Ad Att._, 6.9.4.

[138] Civil Wars of Appian, 2.31.

[139] Velleius Paterculus, 2.48.

[140] Cæsar, Civil War, 1. 12.

[141] _Ibid._, 1.182

[142] _Ibid._, 2.23.

[143] _Ibid._, 2.42.

[144] _Pharsalia_, 4. 807-824.

[145] Cicero, _Epistulæ ad famiares_, 11.27.

[146] Cicero, _Epist. ad fam._, 11.28.

[147] 12.46.1.

[148] Apicius, 4.174.

[149] _Naturalis Historia_, 12.13.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Common People of Ancient Rome
by Frank Frost Abbott

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMON PEOPLE OF ANCIENT ROME ***

***** This file should be named 13226-0.txt or 13226-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/2/2/13226/

Produced by Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.